---
title: NnT's LCD screens
summary: All LCD messages in NnT.
---

<link rel="stylesheet" href="screen.css">

# What do the LCD screens say in NnT?

Similarly to the other pages, here's all the LCD messages that can appear in NnT. Most of them are similar to [AO's](/lcd_ao.html), but there are a few new ones too.

The new messages have a slightly brighter border to differentiate them.

<p class="lcd">Press #JMP# to jump up and hang. Then #JMP# again to hoist up.</p>
<p class="lcd">Tap #JMP# then tilt #DIL# sideways to hop gaps. Press #JMP# while running to leap further.</p>
<p class="lcd">Tap #JMP# then press #DIL# sideways to hop gaps. Press #JMP# while running to leap further.</p>
<p class="lcd">Quiet! Hold #SNK# to sneak past the sleeping Slig.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #USE# to pull lever.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #USE# to use levers and enter opened doors.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #USE# to ride the elevator.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #USE# to enter door.</p>
<p class="lcd">Deactivate bombs with #USE# when the light blinks green. You can reactivate bombs with #USE#.</p>
<p class="lcd">Sneak to steam vents with #SNK#. Sligs can hear you moving even if you're hidden, so be quiet!</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #USE# to get a grenade from the Boom Machine.</p>
<p class="lcd">Tilt #AIM# to aim grenade, then press #THR# to throw it. You can throw grenades while crouching.</p>
<p class="lcd">Hold #AIM# and press direction up/down to aim grenade, then press #THR# to throw it.  You can throw grenades while crouching.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #GSU# to say "Hello" to a Mudokon. Then, talk to Mudokons with #GSU#, #GSD#, #GSL# or #GSR#. Experiment!</p>
<p class="lcd">Say "Hello" and talk to Mudokons using GameSpeak buttons. Experiment!</p>
<p class="lcd">Possess Sligs by chanting. Chant by holding #GS1# + #GS2# at the same time.</p>
<p class="lcd">Help Mudokons escape slavery! Chant with #GS1# + #GS2# when you see a circle of birds.</p>
<p class="lcd">Help Mudokons escape slavery! Chant with #CHT# when you see a circle of birds.</p>
<p class="lcd">Tap #CRO# to crouch, then tilt #DIL# left or right to roll.</p>
<p class="lcd">Tap #CRO# to crouch, then press #DIL# left or right to roll.</p>
<p class="lcd">Tilt #DIL# left or right to run.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #DIL# left or right to run.</p>
<p class="lcd">Stand still when the Motion Detectors touch you!</p>
<p class="lcd">Security doors are for Slig use only!</p>
<p class="lcd">Sligs can command Slogs.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #USE# near lever to operate meat saw.</p>
<p class="lcd red">You're almost free, Abe! You must get through the Stockyards. Good luck... and watch out for those Scrabs! They haven't been fed in a while.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Mudokons entering this door will be slaughtered and packaged as disgusting yet yummy novelty meat products.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Do it, Abe... Do it!!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Escape from RuptureFarms! Watch out for Sligs!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Run, Abe! The Sligs have orders to shoot you on sight!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Die, Abe, die!</p>
<p class="lcd">Lead Mudokons to Bird Portals.</p>
<p class="lcd">Activate all Lever Locks for Zulag Station access.</p>
<p class="lcd">#GSL# to greet all nearby Mudokons at once.</p>
<p class="lcd">Take cover! Stand in front of tall cover or crouch with #CRO# in front of low cover.</p>
<p class="lcd">Practice your throwing with an unlimited supply of bottlecaps. They can even act as useful distractions...</p>
<p class="lcd">Tilt #DIL# down on the platform edge to climb down.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #DIL# down on the platform edge to climb down.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #JMP# while running to jump to a higher ledge. Then #JMP# again to hoist up.</p>

<p class="lcd red">The profits justify the means.</p>
<p class="lcd red">You are who you eat.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Only 1,236 work related accidents this month. Keep up the good work!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Don't play with your food, unless it plays with you first.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Venerate Authority.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Coming soon: Something New 'n' Tasty!</p>
<p class="lcd">You are not the only one who can hide in steam.</p>
<p class="lcd">When a Slig shouts "Look Out!", the wise Mudokon hits the deck.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Decapitation toll cut in half!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Work hard, die young, win valuable prizes!</p>
<p class="lcd red">A little hard work never killed anyone important.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Mama Flabby knows when you screw up.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Address all complaints to your nearest meat grinder.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Boombat infestation in boiler room. Address with caution!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Trade your old Slogs for new and get free Slog chow.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Slig security to escort Mr Ryce to the Stockyards.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">SligCo Security: beating quotas at Rupture Farms!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Getcha Elum Chub on! Oddworld's finest lunchbox gloop!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Scrab Cakes! They'll cost ya an arm and a leg!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Drink cool, refreshing Snot Gulp. Mmm, stringy!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Fire drill later today. Prepare for immolation.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Off-duty Mudokons report to Slig bunks for target practice.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Declogging required in Paramite chutes 3 thru 7.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Mudokons entering R&D will be shot then prosecuted.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Sponsored landmine trials now in operation.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Packing meat in your pants is strictly prohibited.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Happy early retirement, Wildum! You deserve it!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Magog Sign Company: sign your life away!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">New from Lungbuster: Sligarettes!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Cleanup required in insemination vats.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Graffiti will get you graff-hurty.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Rupture Farms meat inspectors expect full complicity.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Rumours of Shrykull are false until proven otherwise.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Today's canteen menu: pawk 'n' been & eyewash stout.</p>
