---
title: AO's LCD messages
summary: All LCD messages in Abe's Exoddus.
---

<link rel="stylesheet" href="/css/screen.css">

# What do the LCD screens say in AO?

This was something I always wondered about, yet I found no real source
that explained it, so I decided to do the job myself. Here's all the texts
that can appear on LCD screens, ripped right from the game's
executable.

For AE's LCD screens click [here](/lcd_ae.html).

For NnT's click [here](/lcd_nnt.html).

<p class="lcd red">The profits justify the means.</p>
<p class="lcd red">You are who you eat.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Only 1,236 work related accidents this month. Keep up the good work!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Don't play with your food, unless it plays with you first.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Venerate Authority.</p>
<p class="lcd">Lead Mudokons to bird portals.</p>
<p class="lcd">You are not the only one who can hide in shadows.</p>
<p class="lcd">When a Slig shouts, Look Out!, the wise Mudokon hits the deck.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Decapitation toll cut in half!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Work hard, die young, win valuable prizes!</p>
<p class="lcd red">A little hard work never killed anyone important.</p>
<p class="lcd">To hoist, stand under the ledge and press (Up).</p>
<p class="lcd">To jump, press (Space). To run and jump, press while you run using To sneak past the sleeping Slig, hold (Shift) while you move.</p>
<p class="lcd">To pull the lever, stand next to it and press To use the ring, stand under it, and press , just like a hoist.</p>
<p class="lcd">To ride the platform, stand in the center of it, and press (Down).</p>
<p class="lcd">To enter the door, stand in front of it and press To deactivate a bomb, crouch next to it by pressing (Down). Then carefully press (Ctrl) when the bomb blinks green. Press (Ctrl) again to reactivate it.</p>
<p class="lcd">Sneak to shadows by holding (Shift) while you move. Stand still in shadows while Slig is facing you, or you will be seen. Sneak behind Slig when it walks away from you.</p>
<p class="lcd">To get a grenade from the Boom Machine, stand in front of it and press (Up). To pick up a grenade, crouch next to it and press (ctrl). To throw the grenade, hold (Z), then press any directional button. Different directions will throw at different angles.</p>
<p class="lcd">It is possible to throw while crouching.</p>
<p class="lcd">To alert a Mudokon, say hello by holding and pressing [1]. Then, talk to Mudokons by holding or [BLANK] and pressing the [BLANK], or [BLANK] button. Experiment!</p>
<p class="lcd">Possess Sligs by chanting. Chant by holding and [BLANK] at the same time or pressing [0] on the keyboard.</p>
<p class="lcd">To help Mudokons escape from slavery in Rupture Farms, chant when you see a circle of birds. To chant, hold [BLANK] and [BLANK] at the same time or pressing [0] on the keyboard.</p>
<p class="lcd">To roll, first crouch by pressing (Down). Then roll left or right by pressing (Left) or (Right). To run, hold (Shift) while you press (Left) or (Right).</p>
<p class="lcd">To avoid the alarm, stand still when the Motion Detectors touch you.</p>
<p class="lcd">Use Slig to talk your way past the security door.</p>
<p class="lcd">Sligs can talk to Slogs.</p>
<p class="lcd">Use lever to operate meat saw.</p>
<p class="lcd">Lead Mudokons to bird portals, then chant to rescue them. Chant by holding [BLANK] and [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd red">You're almost free, Abe! You must get through the stockyards. Good luck ... and watch out for those Scrabs! They haven't been fed in awhile.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Mudokons entering this door will be slaughtered and packaged as disgusting yet yummy novelty meat products.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Do it, Abe ... do it!!!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Your first task is to escape from Rupture Farms. Watch out for Sligs!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Run, Abe! The Sligs have orders to shoot you on sight!</p>
<p class="lcd">To alert a Mudokon, say hello by holding (1) on the keyboard. Then, talk to Mudokons by using the keyboard numbers (1) thru (8). Experiment!</p>
<p class="lcd">To alert a Mudokon, say hello by holding (1) on the keyboard. Then, talk to Mudokons by using the keyboard numbers (1) thru (8). Experiment!</p>
<p class="lcd">To alert a Mudokon, say hello by holding (1) on the keyboard. Then, talk to Mudokons by using the keyboard numbers (1) thru (8). Experiment!</p>
