---
title: The PS5 Soulstorm Footage
summary: "Analysing Oddworld's new teaser trailer that aired on the PS5 stream."
---

# My first thoughts about the PS5 Footage

On June 11th, 2020, **Oddworld: Soulstorm** appeared on Sony's PS5 stream, with an almost two
minutes long teaser trailer featuring a mix of gameplay footage and some cutscenes.

If you haven't seen it yet, here's the link:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/F9b-_jCCBhg" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Observations

My notes in more or less chronological order:

* The cloth Abe is holding in the beginning greatly resembles the map of Oddworld we saw before. It
  has slightly different shapes on it and there are more lines than on the version we've seen, but
  the author of the map has all but confirmed that it is indeed the same thing.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/bag.webp" description="" %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/sammi.webp" description="" %}

* Abe feels very *different* compared to the usual. I can't really find the words, but he looks
  "slimmer" and a bit more "rodent"-like. He looks good, but it's almost like it isn't even Oddworld
  I'm watching.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/abeface.webp" description="" %}

* With all the changes, seeing the good old and familiar SoulStorm Brew font was an unexpected tug
  at my heartstrings.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/brew.webp" description="" %}

* I'm cautiously optimistic about seeing "generic" Mudokons getting screentime and personalities.
  While more characters is obviously a welcome change, I can't help, but be a bit worried,
  remembering what sort of "personalities" they used to have in New 'n' Tasty.

{% include caption.html url='/imgs/ps5/mudokons.webp' description="By the way, what's squid guy doing here?" %}

* The Shaman is a character that has been bugging me since the moment I saw them. Anyone knowing
  even a bit of unreleased lore knows that Queens are these gigantic beings, who hardly resemble the
  male(/drone) offspring. With this fact in mind, I'm very confused by the fact, that this shaman
  looks and sounds very feminine. I am currently heavily leaning on the fact that this might be a
  retcon, as in the Shaman might be an infertile queen who without the royal jelly / hormones,
  remained quite similar to Abe and the others.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/shaman.webp" description="" %}

{% include caption.html url='/imgs/ps5/shaman2.webp' description="Her eyes seem to be blind from cataracts. Also, her mouth and eyelids have marks. I am not sure whether these were painted here or are marks of her own stitches. It would make sense that she's blind, if she used to be a blinded Mudokon" %}

* Hey, least favorite character gets killed off in the trailer. I see this as an absolute win.

{% include caption.html url='/imgs/ps5/deadtoby.webp' description="Haha, sucker!" %}

* The Shaman pays homage to Alf "helping" Abe overcome his fear of entering the Big Well.

{% include caption.html url='/imgs/ps5/kick.webp' description='"Falcon... kick!"' %}

* Placeholder Dripik prevails. His presence is very welcome.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/dripik.webp" description="" %}

* Meanwhile we see a scene in which several Mudokons attempt to climb what appears to be a railway
  bridge, while Sligs shoot at them, lending Abe some negative Quarma. Amusingly, despite the fact,
  that several of them die, it apparently only lead to losing 7.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/quarma.webp" description="" %}

* Sligs can climb poles. I guess this is how the issue of them being bound to only downwards motion
  is tackled on such large scale levels.

{% include caption.html url='/imgs/ps5/climbslig.webp' description='Watch this part again. It looks incredibly silly.' %}

* We see an airship. Abe's Origins details that planes and other flying machines are a very
  important part of Industrialist "culture." It also reminds me heavily of the cut airships from
  Munch's Oddysee.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/airship_mo.webp" description="" %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/airship.webp" description="" %}

* Next we see an area, that I can't really place. Considering I can't place it and it appears to be
  a rocky valley, I heavily suspect that this is the location marked as "Gorge" on the new map.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/gorge.webp" description="" %}

* We finally get to see the turret emplacement, we got a glimpse of back in 2019. It is as I
  suspected a gun turret, amusingly titled "Slig Mama."

{% include caption.html url='/imgs/ps5/sligmama.webp' description="Considering this pun works both as 'Big Mama' and of course referring to the Sligs' own cannibalistic mother, I have to applaud the effort." %}

* In the next clip a train passes in front of us and if you look closely, you can spot a bird portal
  on it.

{% include caption.html url='/imgs/ps5/train.webp' description='The portal is on the very first car after the train' %}

* In the next scene we get a glimpse into the new Necrum Mines. The same slanted rocky formations
  are still visible, along with new features like huge mounted minecart and what appears to be
  gigantic boilers in the background.

{% include caption.html url='/imgs/ps5/mines.webp' description="Ze boilah?" %}

* Abe places his hands into a slightly Mayan looking device. Interestingly, his fingers appear to be
  heavily discolored (like he's suffering from a sort of pigment loss or perhaps his skin was burned
  off). I originally figured the device causes this, but a frame by frame analysis reveals that this
  isn't the case. Also the device has some sort of orange thing in the middle. I am somewhat
  inclined to believe this is what the "bag" we've been shown several times contains.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/device.webp" description="" %}

* Before Abe is blasted by a - frankly quite funny - foghorn, we see more of his surroundings. It
  looks very much like a beehive. This is something I'll detail later.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/beehive.webp" description="" %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/beehive2.webp" description="" %}

* In the next new shot we see Abe hanging off a train, with an expression that reminds me a lot of
  the old games. If the image is compressed enough, one could almost sell it as cut footage from
  Exoddus or Oddysee.

{% include caption.html url='/imgs/ps5/nostalgia.webp' description='[Record scratch] "Yep, that is me. You might be wondering, how I got into this situation."' %}

* Next we see Abe in presumably the bowels of Necrum Mines, where he chases of creatures, we haven't
  seen before. They seem to be a mix of spiders and octopuses, but I really wasn't able to put a
  coherent image in my mind together about them.

{% include caption.html url='/imgs/ps5/creatures.webp' description='Perhaps they are the evolved Fleeches?' %}

* A flying Slig meets his doom and plummets.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/flying.webp" description="" %}

* Apparently Exoddus' "heavy-duty" gates look like this from the side.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/door.webp" description="" %}

* A face teetering on the edge of looking both extremely silly and unnerving.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/shock.webp" description="" %}

* Next we see Abe being lit on fire, running down what appears to be Slig Barracks. Except unlike
  it's usual green backgrounds, this appears to have a more "underbelly" / "maintenance area" feel
  to it.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/barracks.webp" description="" %}

* Next we see something explode in an area I also believe to be Slig Barracks, because of all the
  shanty-town tents at the bottom.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/barracks2.webp" description="" %}

* Abe falls to the ground after being zapped by the Mayan-looking machine. Interestingly a single
  bug flies out of the back of his head. He keeps muttering, so even if he is shocked, he's neither
  knocked unconscious, nor dies.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/lying.webp" description="" %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/firefly.webp" description="" %}

* And of course the trailer ends with the kicker of Abe loosing his stitches. It seems to be a
  largely ceremonial event, considering he speaks with them just fine. I am, however, a bit confused
  by this choice, on a meta-level. While this is of course an impactful moment, the stitches were
  part of Abe's "identity" so to speak. Taking them away is kinda like removing the hat from Mario.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/stitches.webp" description="" %}


## Insect-imagery

Well, I have twice said that I'll get to it later, so here it is: The trailer seems to heavily lean
on the fact, that Mudokons are an insect-like superspecies. Namely in this case, the insect seems to
be either bees or fireflies.

There are several things that convey this:

* The mark on the Shaman's head, not exactly subtle, but that doesn't make it any less important.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/shaman2.webp" description="" %}

* The "beehive"-like structure Abe is in. I am unsure what this place is, but it must be very
  important. The point I'm trying to make is, that the wall heavily resemble beehive-cells and the
  orange-ish colors remind one of honey.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/beehive2.webp" description="" %}

* The firefly-looking insect that leaves Abe's head. Whatever it is, I don't know, but considering
  he visibly flinches when it appears, it must be quite important.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ps5/firefly.webp" description="" %}

* And of course we can't forget that one of the items Abe collects (not seen here, but seen in the
  [IGN gameplay footage](/ign)) is Royal Jelly, a substance that turns suitable offspring into
  potential new queens.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ign/jelly.jpg" description="" %}


As for what does this all mean? I have **absolutely** no idea, however, I am pretty sure there was a
good reason why all this insect imagery ended up in this trailer and I consider it something
important to be on lookout for from now on.


