A few thoughts about Molluck

(The following essay is an amalgamation of canon lore, parts of the unreleased
canon as explained by kjjcarpenter and my personal thoughts on the character.
While I was striving to retell the lore here as actually as possible, please
don't take anything here that you don't absolutely surely know is canon as
fact.)

Today I'd like to talk a bit about the big bad, the "meanest boss in the world",
the guy whose malicious intentions you don't need to be told about, Molluck the
Glukkon. 

https://oddworldlibrary.net/archives/togg/_data/i/galleries/Abes_Oddysee/Concept_Art/CAAO0002-me.jpg

Playing only Abe's Oddysee and Abe's Exoddus and not having cared about the
intended storyline of Munch's Oddysee, one might think that he's really the top
of the foodchain, hell maybe even the owner of the Magog Cartel. The truth is
more complex than this and it might be surprising to some. Molluck is in fact
the prodigal son of Lady Margaret, the actual current owner of the cartel.  The
Glukkon queen gave the task of running it (along with a few other factories,
we'll get to that) as a test to Molluck to prove his worth before he gets an
actually large turf. 

While you might think that RuptureFarms is the "biggest meat processing plant on
Oddworld", it's not. The number part in RF1029 is not a codeword, it's a serial
number. And while it might seem huge to us, Oddworld has ten times as much
surface area as Earth so even a "small" factory like RF is multiple times larger
than one on Earth. In fact, Mudos (the continent where all the currently
released titles take place) is actually kind of a paralell to Africa, with
backwater factories that employ - and exploit - the less developed natives. This
is why it is a huge shock and catastrophe that a Mudokon-uprising could actually
bring down a factory. Imagine a group of tribals with spears and warpaint
winning against a modern army.

I mentioned other factories before so let's continue with that. This might not
be such a surprise as it was pretty explicitly stated in Abe's Exoddus, but it
won't hurt to point it out here too. Molluck is either CEO or at least a major
shareholder of Bonewerkz, FeeCo and Slig Barracks. Remember the reaction of the
three Glukkons, who discuss his disappearance. Dripik mentions that "[he]'s
gonna be pissed" and that "[...] now Necrum Mines, if he ever comes back
[they]'re screwed" so it is obvious that he's a superior of them. Aslik also
says that it's "[their] turn to take over". These combined with Aslik's role of
being *Vice*-President strongly implies - at least to me - that Molluck didn't
only run RuptureFarms, he was also their boss and the owner/shareholder of
Necrum Mines too.

https://oddworldlibrary.net/archives/togg/_data/i/galleries/Oddworld_Movie/Concept_Art/CAOM0002-me.jpg

Even his name was a clever choice as it is a reference to Moloch, the god of
child sacrifice and pretty much all kinds of cruelty. Despite this - and some
might disagree with this - I don't think Molluck is a clear-cut evil in the
series. But first let me clear up something, Abe - especially because he was
employee of the month - and pals were never endangered by this. The Glukkons are
stupid, but not this stupid. The Mudokons used for the Pops would have been
specifically bred for that reason. This of course doesn't make things better,
but it's a very common misconception that I had too. 

The slaughter of innocents is a brutal choice and I'm not trying to justify it,
however, the alternative wouldn't have been much better either. Remember he had to
satisfy a very demanding mother and also an even more demanding group of
investors' expectations. And "profits were grim". Quite likely if he hadn't made
a choice like this he and his colleagues would have ended up disowned and likely
dead.

I'd like to end this post with the short timeline of what happened to him after
the end of Abe's Oddysee. As we seen in the canon good ending, the Mudokons
conjure a mystical thunderstorm over RuptureFarms and struck the nearby Slig to
death with a well aimed lightning bolt. The same fate follows Molluck, whose
suit disintegrates, revealing his surprising anatomy. Except he doesn't die.
Either with a huge amount of luck or the meddling of Oddworldian gods, he is
merely knocked unconscious and branded by the electricity passing through his
head. The storm causes the factory to erupt in flames, however, Molluck gets
himself together before he burns alive and escapes by unknown means. The
authorities raid the factory, but since they can't find his corpse he is declared
wanted for causing a loss of profit to the cartel.

https://oddworldlibrary.net/archives/togg/_data/i/galleries/Munchs_Oddysee/Concept_Art/CAMO0195-me.jpg

https://oddworldlibrary.net/archives/togg/_data/i/galleries/Munchs_Oddysee/Concept_Art/CAMO0196-me.jpg

He also built a personal vault in RuptureFarms, which as the pictures imply
contained some of his most treasured belongings. The painting in the back is
especially interesting, as it portrays a young Molluck standing sheepishly next
to his always menacing mother. The reason why the vault came crashing down is
presumably the facility-wide fire.

The lore here becomes quite vague. Where, how and when this happens is not
known, but one thing is sure: Molluck, despite his best intentions to hide, was
finally captured and he was brought before his very angry mother, who has to
answer to the investors for his son's mistakes. After a likely thunderous
scolding by Margaret, Molluck is escorted to an elevator to meet and to try to
explain himself before the investors. This is where the known lore ends about
him, and thus his fate is left unknown.
