---
title: New Soulstorm information dump
summary: Several gaming news sites wrote about Soulstorm. I collected the important bits out here.
---

# My notes about the new Soulstorm information

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/ss_trailer.jpg" description="" %}

## Intro

So it's finally here! And there is much info shared, so to make it easier, I
collected the most important ones into bullet points. Click on the sites' name
to find the appropriate source. Hope you'll find it useful!

## [IGN](https://www.ign.com/articles/2019/05/13/oddworld-soulstorm-preview-a-the-oddworld-quintology-lives-and-its-prettier-than-ever?sf102565170=1)

- The game will start around NnT's ending
- 2.5D / 2.9D
- You'll be able to return to levels
- You have the choice between stealth/aggressive route
- You'll be able to craft a variety of ammo
- Playtime: 12-15 hours, up to 100 hours in replayability
- Game will cost around $40

## [Polygon](https://www.polygon.com/2019/5/13/18564512/oddworld-soulstorm-preview-lorne-lanning-interview)

- Mudokons are agile and are able to follow Abe anywhere
- Mudokons now fight with you
- Looting/Crafting
- Lanning says the game is a bit like Lemmings, but "they are armed to the teeth"
- You'll need to live in a scavenger's economy: Collect garbage, craft weapons from that, ala Anarchist's cookbook
- More followers -> More spiritual power
- Still no guns for Abe
- Possession is still a thing: Chant to create an Orb, which you can "stick to creatures".
- "That orb itself can get layered with other cosmic abilities, more spiritual abilities, but you’ll earn those through a different chemistry, which we call chi-charms."
- Chi-charms are the game's secondary economy
- Multiple endings, depending on Muds saved
- Early 2020, no platforms yet

## [PCGamer](https://www.pcgamer.com/oddworld-soulstorm-impressions/)

- Open ended puzzles
- Abe can throw flammable liquids at enemies then something that creates a spark -> Boom
- Crafting recipe: Jawbreaker + Rubber bands -> Richocheting jawbreaker. Richocheting jawbreaker + tape -> Richocheting jawbreaker that incapacitates enemies
- You'll be able to pickpocket enemies / loot corpses
- You can give orders to Mudokons
- Half industrial and half nature
- Game is mostly linear, then you reach a train hub (Comet Depot?), then five freely choosable locations
- 30 devs are working on the game

## [PCGamesN](https://www.pcgamesn.com/oddworld-soulstorm/oddworld-soulstorm-abes-exoddus)

- Alert level: More Muds that follow you -> Less manned workplaces -> Higher alert -> More Sligs
- Your "branch" in the story changes with every end of a level, where you get a tally of saved Mudokons and murdered Sligs
- Addiction and human (or rather Mudokon) trafficking are major themes

## [Venturebeat](https://venturebeat.com/2019/05/13/how-lorne-lanning-re-imagined-abes-exoddus-as-oddworld-soulstorm/)

- If you're an employee you get 2 Brews a day, Snoozie at night
- 48 hours of withdrawal kills you
- AI will have "mob dynamics / gang dynamics"
- There will be curved paths and moving in "full dimensional space"
- No more steam vents or shadows, you'll be able to hide in lockers instead (and your followers too)
- You'll be able to set up industrial-scale accidents
- There will be multiple characters to control? (Indicator above Abe with his name)
- Every level is one story, intro/outro, tally.
- There will be more (optional) hint-systems
- There will be an objective log
- You'll be able to "preview" the level and even snipe
- Possession is kill or knock-out
- Spraying Muds with fire-extinguishers will make them fire-repellent
- Select Mudokons will have keys to open other areas of maps
- "We start off in a hideout, with some more native environments. You escape that towering inferno. Then we go into old, abandoned towns that are a little more like Stranger, these old mill towns and mining towns. We have ancient ruins, pretty spooky-looking areas. We wind up at gas stations for trains, big fuel depots. Then we go to a Slig Barracks and the Necrum Mines, a mining factory that’s built on top of a graveyard, basically. They’re mining the bones. That’s the other secret ingredient in the Brew."
- There will be around 1300 Mudokons to save
- There will be leaderboards to compare yourself to the rest of the community

## [PCWorld](https://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2019-05-13-oddworld-soulstorm-the-quintology-is-back-on)

- “You can get through the whole game without killing anybody. Not even the bad guys,”

## [GameInformer](https://www.gameinformer.com/preview/2019/05/13/the-new-true-sequel-20-years-later)

- "Kill a bad guy to save yourself, and you lose some quarma, but cruelly kill a helpless and bound enemy, and the hit to your quarma is much bigger." - Quarma will now be affected by how Abe reacts to enemies. Killing defenseless enemies = bigger penalty.
- "Binocular emplacements allow you to look across the way to guard stations and workers that need rescuing, and plan your route to reach them."

## Things collected from the teaser videos/images:

- Abe will now be able to double jump
- Abe will be able to wield a flamethrower
- Sligs can now shoot in a wide arc and bullets are real bullets now, not hitscanners.

## OWI_Pete:

- Abe is teaching the other Mudokons about their spirituality, they chant along with him and it increases his power.
