---
title: "Starters' Guide"
summary: "A comprehensive guide for beginners and for people who wish to know more about the series and its history alike."
layout: default
tags: ["spec"]
---

# So you want to learn about Oddworld?

Welcome! Whether you are new to the series or a returning fan, this
page intends to help you find more information about Oddworld released
and unreleased canon.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/canon/abeonelum.webp" description="" %}

## Sites

These sites contain content related to Oddworld. Because each of them
handles different kinds of materials, using all of them is recommended

* [TOL](https://oddworldlibrary.net) :: Xavier's Wiki of Oddworld.  It's a
  well-monitored source of information that only a select few members can edit.
  Because of this, the site is relatively small, but should not be
  underestimated. Also this domain contains other projects like
  [TOGG](http://oddworldlibrary.net/archives/togg/) and
  [TOWW](https://oddworldlibrary.net/archives/web/) which are the largest
  resources of Oddworld images and archived Oddworld websites respectively.

* [The Wikia](https://oddworld.fandom.com) :: The public Oddworld
  Wiki. It had a long history of being plagued by misinformation and fanon
  presented as canon, however, in the recent years it has been taken over by a
  competent staff that almost completely renovated the site, making it a useful
  and valid resource.

* [Magog on the March](https://magogonthemarch.wordpress.com) :: Unlike the
  previous two wikis this site is less concerned with documenting things, but
  rather it's real strength is archiving all kinds of obscure information that
  I have no idea how they can even find. The site's design might be a tad bit
  confusing at first, but believe me, if something has ever mentioned Oddworld,
  you can almost be sure that MoM has or will soon have it archived. Also time
  by time they release [videos](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC8rCjlKx9PjbhBN0_UcEXDg/featured)
  about Oddworld's lore in a very viewer-friendly format.

* [OWF](http://owforums.net) :: While the forum has since
  fallen from grace a bit, the thread archives contain valuable information
  from several (ex-)developers. Admittedly OWF is probably the hardest place to
  find info on, but it is there and with some spelunking one might just hit
  gold.

* [Oddwords](https://oddwords.hu) :: My goal is to both theorize and
  to make learning about Oddworld a bit more welcoming to new fans.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/canon/oldslig.jpg" description="" %}

## Recommended reading material

This is obviously a subjective list, however, I believe every fan who
considers themselves interested in the bigger picture should read at least some
of these as they touch upon a few of the most important aspects of planet
Oddworld:

* [Nathan interviews Lorne Lanning again](https://magogonthemarch.wordpress.com/nathan-interviews-lorne-lanning-again/) :: My personal favorite and pretty much
  the most important interview of them all. We get answers to things like the
  planet's size and structure, a glimpse into the Industrialist world, how
  Mudokons worked before they were enslaved, etc.

* [Nathan interviews Lorne Lanning](https://magogonthemarch.wordpress.com/2008-2/nathan-interviews-lorne-lanning/) :: The previous part of the interview above has
  almost as many important details. Together they give a good grasp about the
  world.

* [Oddworld History](https://magogonthemarch.wordpress.com/oddworld-history/)
  :: The first events that sparked the conflict between Glukkons and Mudokons
  told in a kind of campfire story-like manner.

* [Abe's Exoddus - Inhabitants](https://magogonthemarch.wordpress.com/abes-exoddus-inhabitants/) :: While the page concerns itself mostly with the
    characters appearing in Exoddus, it provides enough info about them to earn
    a place on this list.

* [EGX 2017 Caddicarus interview](https://magogonthemarch.wordpress.com/transcripts/egx-2017-lorne-lanning-interview/) :: In this interview Lorne Lanning answered
  questions about the upcoming game, Soulstorm, Mudokon anatomy, the old
  Quintology and other Oddworld-related topics.

* [Soulstorm ARG Summary](https://oddworldlibrary.net/wiki/Soulstorm_ARG_Summary) :: This wiki page contains the summary of the plot of
  Soulstorm's ARG condensed into one long post by Xavier and myself.

* Developer diaries:
    * [Abe's Exoddus - Videogames.net](https://oddworldlibrary.net/wiki/Abe%27s_Exoddus_Designer_Diaries_on_Videogames.com)
    * [Munch's Oddysee - Videogames.net](https://oddworldlibrary.net/wiki/Munch%27s_Oddysee_Designer_Diaries_on_Videogames.com)
    * [Munch's Oddysee - PlayNOW!](https://oddworldlibrary.net/wiki/Munch%27s_Oddysee_Designer_Diaries_on_PlayNOW!)

* [Reddit AMA 2012](https://magogonthemarch.wordpress.com/qa/reddit-ama-2012/)
  :: A free-form Q&A where Stewart Gilray and Lorne Lanning answered some of
  the fans' questions, about their personal life, the games, what their future
  projects were and other topics.

* <p>The Art of Oddworld Inhabitants: The First Ten Years :: This book is a
  treasure trove, sadly quite literally. Because it was printed in such limited
  numbers, finding a reasonably priced copy isn't exactly easy, especially if
  you prefer hardcover books. Sadly for some reason the book was never
  reprinted, nor released as an e-book.</p>

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/canon/monsaic.jpg" description="" %}

## How to start researching a topic?

*"Why do Sligs wear masks? Why's Abe's mouth stitched?  How come we
never hear about a Vykker queen?"*

Eventually all fans start asking themselves questions like this, but finding
the answers might not be as straightforward as one would think. I'd like to
share here my method, which I'm by no means claiming to be the best, but it has
worked for me nicely, so I hope it might inspire a few readers.

The first step is to check whether TOL [The Oddworld Library] has an article
about the question you're interested in. It usually answers the easier
questions in itself.

However, if TOL doesn't provide a satisfactory answer don't give up hope yet,
because MoM [Magog on the March] will surely have at least some obscure
reference to the topic you're looking for. Enter your topic in the searchbar.
Try using as few words as possible, because the query only shows exact matches.
Short expressions like 'Slig' or 'Molluck', etc. are preferrable.

This will likely return a whole lot of articles. I suggest first reading
through a few relevant Dear Alfs. Lorne Lanning took the time and effort to
make Alf vague, but every once in a blue, Mudokon-paw bearing moon, his tongue
"slips" and we get some deep insight into Oddworld.

After Alf, you should continue with developer interviews. There is a surprising
amount of information hidden in these, that we only know about because Lorne
Lanning or someone else casually dropped it.

Hopefully by now you have found whatever you're looking for, but if not, it
might be worth it to check MoM's video archives which contain almost every
appearance of OWI and other developers working on Oddworld caught on tape.

(You might be surprised why I'm not mentioning the other wiki here. While I do
think it's a great resource, I don't recommend newbies to use it as a way of
building their knowledge, as nearly all pages aren't or are only scarcely
cited, making it hard to decide what's real and what's not, as some
misinformation has slipped between the new staff's fingers.)

((If you actually want answers to those questions above, here's the gist of it:

* Glukkons found Sligs far too repulsive, so they force them to wear masks to
  be bearable.

* Abe used to cry a lot when he was a baby.  Fearing that he will be
  slaughtered for being annoying, his mother Sam stitched his mouth shut, which
  he keeps as a memento.
  
* Because Vykkers are hermaphrodites and reproduce freely with each other.))

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/canon/vykkers.jpg" description="" %}

## Abbreviations

I'd like to mention a few of the most common abbreviations the community uses,
which should make communication a bit easier.

### Games:
* **AO** :: Abe's Oddysee
* **AE** :: Abe's Exoddus
* **MO** :: Munch's Oddysee
* **SW** :: Stranger's Wrath
* **NnT** :: New 'n' Tasty
* **SS** :: Soulstorm

### Locations:
* **SSB** :: SoulStorm Brewery / SoulStorm Brew
* **SB** :: Slig Barracks
* **BW** :: Bonewerkz
* **FD** :: FeeCo Depot
* **NM** :: Necrum Mines
* **RF** :: RuptureFarms

### Websites:
* **TOL** :: The Oddworld Library
* **TOGG** :: The Oddworld Graphics Gallery
* **TOWW** :: The Odd-Wide-Web
* **MoM** :: Magog on The March
* **OWF** :: Oddworld Forums

### Specific:
* **OWI** :: Oddworld Inhabitants, the developers behind Oddworld.
* **OW** :: Oddworld
* **LL** :: Lorne Lanning
* **Muds** :: Mudokons
* **Glukks** :: Glukkons
* **UXB** :: The little bombs in AO/AE that blink green every once in a while.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/canon/stranger.jpg" description="" %}

## Where to talk with others about Oddworld?

Of course none of this would mean much if you didn't have anyone else to talk
to about the story. Here are a few communities where you can talk about the
canon or anything else Oddworld related:

* [Official Oddworld](https://discord.gg/oddworld) :: OWI's own Discord.
  Currently this community has the largest active fanbase and you can even chat
  with the developers here.

* [OWF's Discord](http://discord.gg/JGeyUMn) :: The second largest Discord,
  started by a few OWF community members. The server is a lot more tight-knit
  and laid back. Also there are fewer rules.

* [The Oddworld Reddit](https://reddit.com/r/Oddworld) :: A relatively small
  Reddit community based around the game. While it isn't particularly active,
  it does have a very loyal core that comment under basically any kind of post.

* [OWF](http://owforums.net) :: Of course OWF is not only a lore source,
  but also a place where you can talk about the games. While the population of
  the site dropped considerably throughout the years, but it's still a very
  important community for discussing Oddworld.
