THE IRONIC THING ABOUT GLUKKONS

https://ichef.bbci.co.uk/news/1024/media/images/54523000/jpg/_54523105_54522480.jpg

https://oddworldlibrary.net/archives/togg/_data/i/galleries/Abes_Oddysee_New_n_Tasty/Rendered_Art/RANT0135-me.jpg

If you think about it, the attire of the Glukkons is extremely ironic. Their
anatomy would basically let them either run quickly or swing from place to the
other like a monkey. Yet instead of embracing this side of themselves, they hide
their bodies out of pride and meaningless societal customs in tight suits, that
basically bind their hands together, giving them their signature wobbly walk.

KHANZUMERS - UNSTOPPABLE FORCE OR GULLIBLE FOOLS?

https://magogonthemarch.com/nathan-interviews-lorne-lanning-again/

There is a kind of dissonance in the Oddworld Canon about the real power the
consumers - or as they are called in Oddworld Khanzumers - have. Many of
Lanning's interviews place them into an almost god-like status, as creatures,
who have to be appeased or else they would destroy whichever franchise ruined
their mood. However, the interview linked above paints a much different picture.
Here they are vastly different as these Khanzumers depict the gullible and
conformist stereotype of the real-world buyers, who are used as an excuse by
companies who do horrible things in the name of giving them all they want.

MUDOKON GRAVES IN NECRUM

This is not 100% confirmed, but I think it is safe to say that all those curious
stone carvings scattered around Necrum and the Vaults are in fact tombstones or
at very least shrines of long deceased Mudokons.

There is an incredible number of these gravestones in the Mudachee vault, which
~ if we assume that the members of this tribe were also as fierce as the Scrab -
makes a lot of sense. As a total anti-thesis, the Mudomo vault has very few of
the stone markers and they're all well hidden. This might mean that the Paramite
cult had far fewer members or that these Mudokons lived reclusively and away
from danger.

These tombstones also seem to play a role in Soulstorm, as the promotional image
picturing the replacement of Director Phleg also shows many of these artifacts
scattered around in the desert surrounding Necrum.
