---
title: The Oddysee-movie
summary: Did you know that there was an Oddysee movie planned before the game?
---

# THE FORGOTTEN ODDWORLD MOVIE

Recently I have been talking with another Oddworld fan, who was
kind enough to introduce me to the long-abandoned concept of an Oddworld
movie. I'd like to share what he told me and in addition my own thoughts.

Plans for this movie first appeared in the early '90-s, even before the series temporarily received the
arguably silly name of [Epic 1](https://magogonthemarch.com/gamepro-epic-1s-looking-large-in-97-1996/), when Oddworld was still called Offworld.
While some plot elements are similar to Oddysee, most of the story
was wildly different. The story follows the basic structure of [the Hero's Journey](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hero's_journey).

There aren't many sources where we can find info about the Movie,
other than sporadic concept art and an obscure image found in a book from
2007 titled "<cite>Inside Game Design</cite>".

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/movie_flow2.jpg" description='<center><a href="/imgs/movie_flow2.jpg">A picture taken from an other angle </a> / <a href="/imgs/movie_flow1.jpg">Full size</a></center>' %}

There is no "official" plot posted anywhere, but a vague story can be
reconstructed from the picture above. I have taken some creative
liberties to make the text more enjoyable, but it should still largely
follow the plot points from the flowchart.

## THE PLOT

The story takes place in RuptureFarms. A female reporter called Panx
or Parix (the text is far too blurry to discern, this text will call her
Parix) goes to the facility to create a documentary. She sees the state
of the facility and is surprised at the indifference of Molluck.

Meanwhile Abe (whose job is not explicitly mentioned, but is likely
something related to handling animals as he knows that "there won't be
any more baby cows"), undergoes a crisis as he realizes he wants to break
free from the facility, but he's too afraid to break the rules.

This all changes when his roommate, an artificial inseminator called
Stumpy is summoned before Molluck. While he is away, Abe meets with Parix
and the reporter questions him. However, all is for naught, as Parix is
contacted by her boss, who tells her that RuptureFarms is closing it's
doors, so no one will care about her story. Stumpy returns and takes Abe
to a newborn creature simply referred to as "Bull". Abe takes a liking in
the creature and bonds with him. Molluck soon arrives and Abe - who was
hidden away by Stumpy - overhears that the Glukkon thinks the Bull is a
threat and orders the death of the animal with the intention to turn his
meat turned into veal. This gives Abe the necessary kick to finally be
brave enough to break the rules and decides to save Bull. Of course
nothing is so easy and he accidentaly releases tons of other animals and
he is thus forced to flee from the facility.

Meanwhile Stumpy overhears the conversation between Parix and her boss
and becomes suspicious of the whole situation. Molluck, who is afraid of
bankruptcy, declares martial law in the plant and orders Parix - who
knows too much - to be caught and silenced. The reporter doesn't sense
the danger and because of her clumsiness and over-confidence she can't
reach her taxi in time, which leaves.  Stumpy's suspicions are proven
correct, when he learns about Molluck's "awful plan" to save
RuptureFarms. The details of this plan are not explained, but seeing
Oddysee, the most likely candidate is the "Turning Mudokons into
food".

While the events in RuptureFarms are happening, Abe wanders in the
wilderness where he finally realizes what his real role is. He meets the
herd of the animals he accidentaly freed and bonds with them, becoming
their shepherd. His faith in the beasts becomes a faith in himself.

The released part of the story ends with Abe hearing screams. He
rushes to the source of the sound who turns out to be Parix, who was left
for dead, but somehow survived.


[OWF thread about the movie.](http://www.owforums.net/showthread.php?t=21672)

[Reddit thread with an alternative plot interpretation.](https://www.reddit.com/r/oddworld/comments/2b7gg2/oddworld_film_flowchart/)
