---
title: Thoughts
summary: Some random facts, I thought are worth sharing.
---

# Thoughts

### Things that I've felt like are worth sharing, but don't really fit anywhere else

### THE IRONIC THING ABOUT GLUKKONS

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/thoughts/molluck_naked.avif" description="" %}

If you think about it, the attire of the Glukkons is extremely ironic.
Their anatomy would basically let them either run quickly or swing from
place to the other like a monkey.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/thoughts/monkey.avif" description="" %}

Yet instead of embracing this side of themselves, they hide their bodies
out of pride and meaningless societal customs in tight suits, that
basically bind their hands together, giving them their signature wobbly
walk.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/thoughts/junexec.avif" description="" %}

### KHANZUMERS - UNSTOPPABLE FORCE OR GULLIBLE FOOLS?

There is a kind of dissonance in the Oddworld Canon about the real power the
consumers - or as they are called in Oddworld Khanzumers - have. Many of
Lanning's interviews place them into an almost god-like status, as creatures,
who have to be appeased or else they would destroy whichever franchise ruined
their mood.

However, the interview linked above paints a much different picture.
Here they are vastly different as these Khanzumers depict the gullible and
conformist stereotype of the real-world buyers, who are used as an excuse by
companies who do horrible things in the name of giving them all they want.

Source: [Interview with Lorne Lanning](https://magogonthemarch.com/nathan-interviews-lorne-lanning-again/)

### MUDOKON GRAVES IN NECRUM

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/thoughts/grave1.avif" description="" %}

~~This is not 100% confirmed, but I think it is safe to say that all those
curious stone carvings are in fact tombstones or at very least shrines of
long deceased Mudokons.~~

Alex Carroll just confirmed that these are in fact tombstones and that
their design differences are intentional:

> [Alex Carroll:](https://discordapp.com/channels/293291256736382976/293291256736382976/552469549338066955)
>
> "Oh yeah, the graves are definitely specific."

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/thoughts/grave2.avif" description="" %}

There is an incredible number of these gravestones in the Mudachee
vault, which - if we assume that the members of this tribe were also as
fierce as the Scrab - makes a lot of sense.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/thoughts/grave3.avif" description="" %}

As a total anti-thesis, the Mudomo vault has very few of the stone
markers and they're all well hidden or at least out of sight. This might
mean that the Paramite cult had far fewer members or that these Mudokons
lived reclusively and away from danger.

An interesting difference between the Mudomo and the Mudanchee
tombstones is that while the former's top connects, the latter's do not,
forming a pair of "horns".

A detail I very much loved is that in the "neutral" (so neither Mudomo,
nor Mudanchee) parts of Necrum both tombstones appear. I think this is a
really insightful design choice as they could have just as easily only
included one. Yet, they instead went with the more story-wise logical
version.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/thoughts/tombstones.avif" description="Similar tombstones were supposed to appear in Stranger." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/brewing_pics/phleg_landscape.avif" description="" %}

These tombstones seem to also play a role in Soulstorm, as the
promotional image above - picturing the replacement of Director Phleg -
shows many of these artifacts scattered around in the desert surrounding
Necrum. It might be worth noting that both types of tombstones appear and
yet again the Mudanchee-style ones outnumber the Mudomo-ones.
