---
title: What do those LCD screens say?
summary: All LCD messages in AO, AE, and NnT.
---

# What do those LCD Screens screens say?

<link rel="stylesheet" href="/css/screen.css">

This was something I always wondered about, yet I found no real source
that gathered them, so I decided to do the job myself. Here's all the texts
that can appear on LCD screens, ripped right from the games' executables.

## Abe's Oddysee

<p class="lcd red">The profits justify the means.</p>
<p class="lcd red">You are who you eat.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Only 1,236 work related accidents this month. Keep up the good work!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Don't play with your food, unless it plays with you first.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Venerate Authority.</p>
<p class="lcd">Lead Mudokons to bird portals.</p>
<p class="lcd">You are not the only one who can hide in shadows.</p>
<p class="lcd">When a Slig shouts, Look Out!, the wise Mudokon hits the deck.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Decapitation toll cut in half!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Work hard, die young, win valuable prizes!</p>
<p class="lcd red">A little hard work never killed anyone important.</p>
<p class="lcd">To hoist, stand under the ledge and press (Up).</p>
<p class="lcd">To jump, press (Space). To run and jump, press while you run using To sneak past the sleeping Slig, hold (Shift) while you move.</p>
<p class="lcd">To pull the lever, stand next to it and press To use the ring, stand under it, and press , just like a hoist.</p>
<p class="lcd">To ride the platform, stand in the center of it, and press (Down).</p>
<p class="lcd">To enter the door, stand in front of it and press To deactivate a bomb, crouch next to it by pressing (Down). Then carefully press (Ctrl) when the bomb blinks green. Press (Ctrl) again to reactivate it.</p>
<p class="lcd">Sneak to shadows by holding (Shift) while you move. Stand still in shadows while Slig is facing you, or you will be seen. Sneak behind Slig when it walks away from you.</p>
<p class="lcd">To get a grenade from the Boom Machine, stand in front of it and press (Up). To pick up a grenade, crouch next to it and press (ctrl). To throw the grenade, hold (Z), then press any directional button. Different directions will throw at different angles.</p>
<p class="lcd">It is possible to throw while crouching.</p>
<p class="lcd">To alert a Mudokon, say hello by holding and pressing [1]. Then, talk to Mudokons by holding or [BLANK] and pressing the [BLANK], or [BLANK] button. Experiment!</p>
<p class="lcd">Possess Sligs by chanting. Chant by holding and [BLANK] at the same time or pressing [0] on the keyboard.</p>
<p class="lcd">To help Mudokons escape from slavery in Rupture Farms, chant when you see a circle of birds. To chant, hold [BLANK] and [BLANK] at the same time or pressing [0] on the keyboard.</p>
<p class="lcd">To roll, first crouch by pressing (Down). Then roll left or right by pressing (Left) or (Right). To run, hold (Shift) while you press (Left) or (Right).</p>
<p class="lcd">To avoid the alarm, stand still when the Motion Detectors touch you.</p>
<p class="lcd">Use Slig to talk your way past the security door.</p>
<p class="lcd">Sligs can talk to Slogs.</p>
<p class="lcd">Use lever to operate meat saw.</p>
<p class="lcd">Lead Mudokons to bird portals, then chant to rescue them. Chant by holding [BLANK] and [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd red">You're almost free, Abe! You must get through the stockyards. Good luck ... and watch out for those Scrabs! They haven't been fed in awhile.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Mudokons entering this door will be slaughtered and packaged as disgusting yet yummy novelty meat products.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Do it, Abe ... do it!!!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Your first task is to escape from Rupture Farms. Watch out for Sligs!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Run, Abe! The Sligs have orders to shoot you on sight!</p>
<p class="lcd">To alert a Mudokon, say hello by holding (1) on the keyboard. Then, talk to Mudokons by using the keyboard numbers (1) thru (8). Experiment!</p>
<p class="lcd">To alert a Mudokon, say hello by holding (1) on the keyboard. Then, talk to Mudokons by using the keyboard numbers (1) thru (8). Experiment!</p>
<p class="lcd">To alert a Mudokon, say hello by holding (1) on the keyboard. Then, talk to Mudokons by using the keyboard numbers (1) thru (8). Experiment!</p>

## New 'n' Tasty

The new messages (i.e. those which don't appear in Abe's Oddysee) have a slightly brighter border to differentiate them.

<p class="lcd">Press #JMP# to jump up and hang. Then #JMP# again to hoist up.</p>
<p class="lcd">Tap #JMP# then tilt #DIL# sideways to hop gaps. Press #JMP# while running to leap further.</p>
<p class="lcd">Tap #JMP# then press #DIL# sideways to hop gaps. Press #JMP# while running to leap further.</p>
<p class="lcd">Quiet! Hold #SNK# to sneak past the sleeping Slig.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #USE# to pull lever.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #USE# to use levers and enter opened doors.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #USE# to ride the elevator.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #USE# to enter door.</p>
<p class="lcd">Deactivate bombs with #USE# when the light blinks green. You can reactivate bombs with #USE#.</p>
<p class="lcd">Sneak to steam vents with #SNK#. Sligs can hear you moving even if you're hidden, so be quiet!</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #USE# to get a grenade from the Boom Machine.</p>
<p class="lcd">Tilt #AIM# to aim grenade, then press #THR# to throw it. You can throw grenades while crouching.</p>
<p class="lcd">Hold #AIM# and press direction up/down to aim grenade, then press #THR# to throw it.  You can throw grenades while crouching.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #GSU# to say "Hello" to a Mudokon. Then, talk to Mudokons with #GSU#, #GSD#, #GSL# or #GSR#. Experiment!</p>
<p class="lcd">Say "Hello" and talk to Mudokons using GameSpeak buttons. Experiment!</p>
<p class="lcd">Possess Sligs by chanting. Chant by holding #GS1# + #GS2# at the same time.</p>
<p class="lcd">Help Mudokons escape slavery! Chant with #GS1# + #GS2# when you see a circle of birds.</p>
<p class="lcd">Help Mudokons escape slavery! Chant with #CHT# when you see a circle of birds.</p>
<p class="lcd">Tap #CRO# to crouch, then tilt #DIL# left or right to roll.</p>
<p class="lcd">Tap #CRO# to crouch, then press #DIL# left or right to roll.</p>
<p class="lcd">Tilt #DIL# left or right to run.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #DIL# left or right to run.</p>
<p class="lcd">Stand still when the Motion Detectors touch you!</p>
<p class="lcd">Security doors are for Slig use only!</p>
<p class="lcd">Sligs can command Slogs.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #USE# near lever to operate meat saw.</p>
<p class="lcd red">You're almost free, Abe! You must get through the Stockyards. Good luck... and watch out for those Scrabs! They haven't been fed in a while.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Mudokons entering this door will be slaughtered and packaged as disgusting yet yummy novelty meat products.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Do it, Abe... Do it!!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Escape from RuptureFarms! Watch out for Sligs!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Run, Abe! The Sligs have orders to shoot you on sight!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Die, Abe, die!</p>
<p class="lcd">Lead Mudokons to Bird Portals.</p>
<p class="lcd">Activate all Lever Locks for Zulag Station access.</p>
<p class="lcd">#GSL# to greet all nearby Mudokons at once.</p>
<p class="lcd">Take cover! Stand in front of tall cover or crouch with #CRO# in front of low cover.</p>
<p class="lcd">Practice your throwing with an unlimited supply of bottlecaps. They can even act as useful distractions...</p>
<p class="lcd">Tilt #DIL# down on the platform edge to climb down.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #DIL# down on the platform edge to climb down.</p>
<p class="lcd">Press #JMP# while running to jump to a higher ledge. Then #JMP# again to hoist up.</p>

<p class="lcd red">The profits justify the means.</p>
<p class="lcd red">You are who you eat.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Only 1,236 work related accidents this month. Keep up the good work!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Don't play with your food, unless it plays with you first.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Venerate Authority.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Coming soon: Something New 'n' Tasty!</p>
<p class="lcd">You are not the only one who can hide in steam.</p>
<p class="lcd">When a Slig shouts "Look Out!", the wise Mudokon hits the deck.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Decapitation toll cut in half!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Work hard, die young, win valuable prizes!</p>
<p class="lcd red">A little hard work never killed anyone important.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Mama Flabby knows when you screw up.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Address all complaints to your nearest meat grinder.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Boombat infestation in boiler room. Address with caution!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Trade your old Slogs for new and get free Slog chow.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Slig security to escort Mr Ryce to the Stockyards.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">SligCo Security: beating quotas at Rupture Farms!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Getcha Elum Chub on! Oddworld's finest lunchbox gloop!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Scrab Cakes! They'll cost ya an arm and a leg!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Drink cool, refreshing Snot Gulp. Mmm, stringy!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Fire drill later today. Prepare for immolation.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Off-duty Mudokons report to Slig bunks for target practice.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Declogging required in Paramite chutes 3 thru 7.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Mudokons entering R&D will be shot then prosecuted.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Sponsored landmine trials now in operation.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Packing meat in your pants is strictly prohibited.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Happy early retirement, Wildum! You deserve it!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Magog Sign Company: sign your life away!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">New from Lungbuster: Sligarettes!</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Cleanup required in insemination vats.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Graffiti will get you graff-hurty.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Rupture Farms meat inspectors expect full complicity.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Rumours of Shrykull are false until proven otherwise.</p>
<p class="lcd red new">Today's canteen menu: pawk 'n' been & eyewash stout.</p>

## Abe's Exoddus

<p class="lcd">If you are silent and still in shadows, you cannot be seen.</p>
<p class="lcd">To run, hold [BLANK] while you move.</p>
<p class="lcd">To enter the mine car, stand in front of it and press [BLANK]. To exit the mine car, press [BLANK]. To make the mine car drop from a ceiling, press [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd">Press [BLANK] to hop.</p>
<p class="lcd">You can make a possessed Slig blast stuff in the foreground by pressing [BLANK] while holding [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd red">Only a fool or a murderer would pull this lever.</p>
<p class="lcd">Blind Mudokons keep walking until you tell them to wait. Tell them to wait by pressing [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd">Try bouncing rocks off the wall.</p>
<p class="lcd">Say hello to all the Mudokons at once by pressing [BLANK]. Then tell them to follow you by pressing [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd">If you sneak, any Mudokons following you will also sneak.</p>
<p class="lcd">You will need help to turn all the wheels at once. Position a Mudokon in front of a wheel, then tell it to work by pressing [BLANK]. You may need to slap the Mudokon to get it to calm down.</p>
<p class="lcd">Sneak behind the Slig as it walks away from you.</p>
<p class="lcd">The only way to make a Mudokon calm down is to slap it. To slap a Mudokon, stand next to it and press [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd red">Laughing gas makes Mudokons slap-happy.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Sligs ahead ... be quiet.</p>
<p class="lcd">Stand on top of the arrow and press (down arrow)</p>
<p class="lcd">Execute a roll while running by pressing [BLANK] while you run.</p>
<p class="lcd">After saying hello to the Mudokon, tell it you are sorry by standing next to it and pressing [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd">To turn the wheel, stand in front of it and press [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd">Lead Mudokons to bird portals, then chant to rescue them. Chant by holding [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd">Use lever to operate bone saw.</p>
<p class="lcd">Sligs can talk to Slogs.</p>
<p class="lcd">Use Slig to talk your way past the security door.</p>
<p class="lcd">To avoid the alarm, stand still when the Motion Detectors touch you.</p>
<p class="lcd">To walk, press (left) or (right). To run, hold [BLANK] while you move.</p>
<p class="lcd">To roll, first crouch by pressing [BLANK]. Then roll left or right by pressing [BLANK] or [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd">To help Mudokons escape from slavery chant when you see a circle of birds. To chant, hold [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd">Possess Sligs by chanting. Chant by holding</p>
<p class="lcd">To alert a Mudokon, say hello by pressing [BLANK]. Then, talk to Mudokons by pressing [BLANK] or [BLANK]. Experiment!</p>
<p class="lcd">Practice throwing here. You can stand on the arrow and hit every mine. It is possible to throw while crouching.</p>
<p class="lcd">To get a rock from the rock sack, stand under it and press [BLANK]. To pick up a rock, crouch next to it and press [BLANK]. To throw the rock, hold [BLANK], then press any directional button. Different directions will throw at different angles.</p>
<p class="lcd">Sneak to shadows by holding while you move. Stand still in shadows while Slig is facing you, or you will be seen. Sneak behind Slig when it walks away from you.</p>
<p class="lcd">To deactivate a bomb, crouch next to it by pressing [BLANK]. Then carefully press [BLANK] when the bomb blinks green. Press [BLANK] again to reactivate it.</p>
<p class="lcd">To ride the platform, stand in the center of it, and press (up).</p>
<p class="lcd">To use the ring, stand under it, and press [BLANK], just like a hoist.</p>
<p class="lcd">To pull the lever, stand next to it and press [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd">To sneak past the sleeping Slig, hold [BLANK] while you move.</p>
<p class="lcd">To hop, press [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd">To hoist, stand under the falling debris and press (up arrow).</p>
<p class="lcd">To enter the well, stand in front of it and press [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd">To enter the door, stand in front of it and press [BLANK].</p>
<p class="lcd red">Legz Iz Uz : if you can find a better leg, buy it!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Vykkers Lab reports SoulStorm Brew totally safe! Dont think, drink!</p>
<p class="lcd red">FeeCo FatVats. When you got serious fat, you need a serious vat.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Keep yer employees in the dark with the all- new Eyestitch 2000. The ultimate blinding machine</p>
<p class="lcd red">Blowco Bonesaws. Perfect powder - every time.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Moolah Ticker...SolstrmBrw UP...FeeCo UP Bonwrkz UP...Rptfrms DOWN! DOWN! DOWN!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Phlegs Bonepaste...good to the last glop.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Vykkers Labs. Molding the future out of you.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Wanted: Mudokon Fleech flusher. No experience necessary.</p>
<p class="lcd red">New from RuptureFarms: Weenie babies! Sausage has never been this much fun!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Find the secret prize inside every specially marked package of RuptureFarms mystery meat!</p>
<p class="lcd red">AzGasCo: Growing one fart at a time.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Wanted: Bullet catchers and grenade testers. Apply in person to General Dripik. Qualified recruits only.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Feeco Depot: Where will we send you today?</p>
<p class="lcd red">SoulStorm Brew: Just drink it!</p>
<p class="lcd red">If yer blue, drink Brew!</p>
<p class="lcd red">New and improved SoulStorm Brew...Twice the flavor...twice the bones...twice the price!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Scrab Cakes MMMM MMMM They'll cost ya an arm and a leg!</p>
<p class="lcd red">SoulStorm Brew...Our spew is your brew!</p>
<p class="lcd red">FeeCo Food Extractors...Eat Twice...Feels Nice...One Price!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Molluck's MouthLube -- Say it, don't spray it!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Smuggling bones in your pants is grounds for immediate termination!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Need a (permanent) vacation? Consult a Slig supervisor.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Depressed ... ? Then work harder!</p>
<p class="lcd red">Drink cool, clear, depressing SoulStorm Brew.</p>
<p class="lcd red">You break it, you bought it.</p>
<p class="lcd red">Work! Do it!</p>
<p class="lcd red">SoulStorm Mining Company is an equal opportunity employer.</p>
