---
title: "Museum"
summary: "A look through my memes over the years. The page is massive, don't use mobile traffic."
---

<style>
    .videobox {
        display: grid;
        grid-template-columns: 1fr 1fr;
        grid-gap: 1rem;
    }

    .videobox .video_cont {
        width: 100%;
    }

    .videobox .video_cont p {
        width: inherit;
        text-align: center;
        font-size: calc(var(--font-size) - 2px);
    }

    .videobox .video_cont video {
        width: inherit;
    }

    @media (max-width: 990px) {
        .videobox {
            grid-template-columns: 1fr;
            width: 100%;
        }
    }
</style>

# Museum of my Own

As it turns out I've been in this fandom for nearly five years now and as any enthusiastic youngster
I too created some memes to entertain the fellow fans and to comment on the situations. In this post
I'd like to post some of my content that I've amassed over the years along with a few comments here
and there as explanation.

## The GIFs

Ah the GIFs. I only recently started using them because I've mostly focused on images and videos
before, but they are an amazing format for conveying very short and simple emotions.

<div class="videobox">
{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/well.gif" description="My first GIF, a very simple pun, but the animation makes it satisfying." %}
{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/lovethisjobconv2.gif" description="Actually the first GIF I was asked to made by someone from OWF. It works surprisingly well." %}
{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/cope3.gif" description="For when your opponent is coping..." %}
{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/seethe.gif" description="... or seething hard." %}
{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/cringe.gif" description="The only GIF that contains extra editing. I originally just wanted to caption it and be done, but it worked better this way." %}
{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/troll2.gif" description="My take on the classic 'We do a little trolling' GIF." %}
{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/copeslig2.gif" description="Poking a bit of fun at a very prevalent world-view in the fanbase." %}
{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/whoasked.gif" description="To this day they are still looking." %}
</div>

## The Images

And of course we have some images. From very low effort to very high effort, I've made a lot
of them. As always, you can click on them to open them in large, which might be necessary to read some.

<div class="videobox">

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/s55ia93m8g061.avif" description="This meme is about the social media action OWI tried, which failed due to Facebook never gaining enough likes." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/8jd3eq347gi31.avif" description="I made this back when OWI announced the EGS exclusivity deal. Many of us continue to feel that it was unfair and not consumer friendly." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/9cpjsfoe38s41.avif" description="One of my several memes poking fun at the fact that Soulstorm was delayed so many times." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/m5ias81sxqc41.avif" description="See above." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/izkrqupj47c51.avif" description="The first version of my
Oddworld poltiical compass meme. Later I made a revised version which can be seen below." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/nc8kmnih89c51.avif" description="The second version of the political compass, with additional characters and text. Amusingly someone posted it five times to 4chan's /v/ board trying to start threads. I'm deeply honoured." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/kkobmw3im1m61.avif" description="Some started memeing this cutscene, so of course I too had to have my go at it." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/lbytt5zdnrj51.avif" description="Remember the Switch and Vita ports along with how SW and MO got multiple PC ports. Poor AO and AE see no love at all." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/o06g359bcdq61.avif" description="A meme poking fun at the fact that people over the seas had very little chance at buying the pre-order edition." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/xyfxxwn090m41.avif" description="A meme from the Boomer vs Zoomer era. Not my best work, but I made it during a very boring university lecture, so with that in mind it didn't end up half-bad." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/tuc50attcxi51.avif" description="One of my two Stonetoss-format memes. Both of them garnered minor criticisms for using a controversial author's work. I personally find this ridiculous, just because I find his comics are easy to exploit for memes, it doesn't mean I agree with them." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/urpft4eofmh61.avif" description="My second Stonetoss-format meme. This also capitalizes on the recent Amogus trend." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/4gdry4h46g161.avif" description="An allusion between AO's intro and OWI's shrinking number of likes on Facebook. The number has only sunk since." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/zftqwg1el0s61.avif" description="A meme about Soulstorm's tower defense sections which garnered near universal hate for being really-really annoying and frustrating." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/new/based_fone2.avif" description="An Oddworld twist on the classic 'Based Department Pepe' picture." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/new/bathroom.avif" description="There can't be a meme compilation without at least one Deus Ex meme." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/new/chug.avif" description="Brew is made from our bones?!" %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/new/fire.avif" description="As evidenced by Soulstorm." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/new/free.avif" description="The mods at OWI's Discord sadly do it for free. Someone was even banned for this picture." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/new/owi.avif" description="See previous meme. But also due to the fact that people are too worried to speak their mind, which usually leads to very boring conversations." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/new/oddcat.avif" description="A twist on the popular 'Petting my cat' meme." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/new/odd.avif" description="In reference to the classic 'If only you knew how bad things really are' 4chan meme." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/new/ss.avif" description="Like always OWF represents the more critical side of the fandom." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/new/ss2.avif" description="This amazing Slig drawing was made
by OWF user Slag?. Yes the question mark is included." %}

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/gifs/new/big.avif" description="A Big Smoke edit of Notbop's pipecleaner-Abe." %}

</div>

## Conclusion

Well, I'll be honest I didn't expect to have made so many things, but I guess they simply piled up
over the years. I hope you've as much fun watching them as I've had making them.
