---
title: "(Don't) Let there be Light"
summary: "Oddwords got a dark mode."
---

# (Don't) Let there be Light

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/lightswitch.avif" description="Two sides of the same coin, albeit one is way less likely to burn your eyes out at night." %}

It's no big secret that the design of Oddwords [isn't exactly set in stone.](/oddwords_history)
Through its little more than three years of existence, it underwent several heavy changes, but there
was one thing I always held very important, when designing the site: **being lightweight.** For this
reason I opted to more or less ban JavaScript on my website, use WebP instead of JPG/PNG where
applicable and keep imported fonts to a minimum (nowadays I only import Open Sans, which I use
everywhere.)

Today, however, I've opted to deviate a bit from my principles and introduce some JS to the website.
The reason for this is simple: If you take a glance in the top right corner of the page's header,
you'll most likely see a small lightbulb. Click on it and the page turns from its usual warm yellow
colors to a grayish appearance. Click on it again and the process is reversed. And as an added
bonus, your browser will remember which one you settled on, so no need to keep switching it on or
off.

As an added bonus, even if your browser doesn't support JavaScript or you do not trust my
terrifying ~30 lines long script (which you can find [here](/assets/js/lightswitch.js)) and have
disabled it, the website will simply default to the original light design and won't even display
that pesky lightbulb which would just take up space uselessly without the code behind it.

### Tech details

This was achieved by refactoring the page's CSS files to use variables instead of using hardcoded
values for colors. The [colorscheme.css](/css/colorscheme.css) stylesheet simply contains the
values for these variables and the JS code just swaps between them as necessary. All of this
happens under the hood, all the user sees is a (hopefully) snappy transition between the two.
