---
title: Unfostered Community
summary: ""
---

# Unfostered Community

## The Failure of Establishing the Long-term

With such a pretentious and foreboding title, you might be wondering just what exactly rustled my
jimmies so hard. Well to be frank, it's a post I wanted to write for a long time, but never really
had the time nor the mood, as stirring drama is not really my kind of thing. Yet here we are, I
personally think OWI is in the process (and has been for the last 5 or so years) of majorly shooting
themselves in the foot due to one easy to understand, albeit not simple issue: Not fostering the
community (half-roll credits.)

What I mean by this is the fact that due to the irregularity and half-hearted nature of community
events there is a very permeating feeling of "emptiness" on whichever social media page one checks.
Not many bother to talk and even those who do usually don't really find that much common ground. The
usual suspects are of course brought up time and time again, but the uncomfortable truth more and
more accept nowadays is that we simply *ran out.* Sure we can go over a hundred and twenty times how
nice Sligstorm would have been or find some minute detail on some twenty plus years old drawing and
go into the wide, wild world of headcanoning, but eventually even these run dry.

If you've spent some time around the fandom, you surely know what I'm talking about, but you might
be wondering just why this matters. Well, while one might consider fan interactions a secondary
thing, it is actually super important for a series to stay afloat. If you think about any successful
recent franchises, especially from the non-triple-A kinds, they almost all have (or have recently
had) extremely flourishing fanbases. Sometimes so much so that it straight up annoys people. One
only has to think of recent stars like Undertale and FNAF to understand that half of the success of
these series came from the fact that people *always* had something to talk about, whether it was fan
theories or actively finding the secrets of the games.

Of course the same worked for Oddworld too for many a years, but as recent trends show it is simply
not enough anymore. What the series really needs is new content or at the very least old content
that hasn't been seen previously, like the venerable, yet sadly discontinued Lost Archives series.
Despite not garnering as much immediate attention as one would perhaps expect, it generated extra
conversations for years even after it ended, with very little effort necessary from OWI's part. I
mean sure, finding and cropping the images might take a while, but ultimately the whole process of
doing that then slapping a banner on them is still an extremely easy way to generate content in the
large scale of things.

Similarly, the extremely short-lived Q&A videos with Lorne Lanning were an excellent way of drumming
up a bit of conversation, especially considering the infatuation many fans have with the author. Yet
this series too was axed after just three episodes. Understandable, considering the bumpy
development history of Soulstorm, yet now that the game is out and engagement is dropping - more on
that in a minute, - it'd be a moderately low-effort way to perhaps bring it back up a little. Though
of course, it's also magnitudes more time consuming than throwing together a few images in paint.

So above and even previously in the post I have been talking about dropping interest. I have to
admit that I work with public analytic data, so who knows, there might be some super secret graph
that ultimately says "Nope, everything is fine, let's carry on like this." However, due to the
effect it regardless has on the community, I still feel like it's important to talk about the
decreasing numbers.

I have been dutifully writing down every single day since the 1st of March how much engagement OWI's
Discord got and the numbers are - as can be seen, - extremely telling. After the initial craze of
Soulstorm's release things went back to basically how they were - or in some cases even went below
their usual levels. Fixing something like this takes a very specific solution. If you were to say
dump a thousand new people in the Discord, they'd just get bored extremely quickly and leave. Even
if OWI released a hundred patches and polished Soulstorm up to 11, it'd still not be enough, because
people can discuss lore without a polished game and yet no one really talks about the game's story
anymore.

But of course you might say, fine, who cares about the Discord, it's obviously not the main form of
engagement, but then I'd like to ask back, what is then? OWI's Facebook page has been steadily
bleeding like for months, even with the release in between? Or their Twitter that grew by 2000
people? Or perhaps their Instagram with around 1.3k new followers? Even if these places saw growth,
can anyone really call them 'communities'? I wouldn't. They are places of loose or nonexistent
conversations, fit only to explain your own immediate opinion of something or engage in an inane
flamewar, with someone who perhaps disagrees.

Even if we turn to the unofficial side, we have a half-dead (or depending on who you ask, fully
dead) OWF (the site), which always separated itself from OWI (the company doing the same), the
Reddit which after a slight spike dropped dead faster Abe after touching an deactivated piston and
the other fan Discords, which thrive, but have largely demoted Oddworld to something of a "common
denominator" (as in references that everyone understands), instead of the main course.