---
title: "Reviewing Soulstorm"
summary: "After 5 years in development, was it worth the wait?"
---

# Reviewing Soulstorm

This post has been brewing (no pun intended) inside me for a long time now, however, due to personal
reasons I was unable to ever take the time to sit down and just write it out of myself until now, so
sadly I've missed the initial review-wave. On the flipside I've had plenty of time to figure out
just what I really wanted to say about this game, so that's something I guess.

I see no point in messing around much, so let's get into this thing:

## Story Analysis

Unlike how the classic games started there is no camera pan and narration that describes a pivotal
location in the story, instead we're thrust right into the middle of the action in the form of a
cutscene that we've seen a few years before the game came out. Immediately a problem arises:

Why is Alf surprised to see the Brewery? Because, I'll be frank from what we later see in the story,
both Toby and him knows this is where they're headed and other than being imposing - a feature most
other locations Abe visits also share - I don't really see what he's on about. To me it sort of
feels like this scene wasn't really made with the later story points in mind, rather as its own
thing that can both be used as-is in-game and as promotional material. Regardless, we soon see Abe,
who's very busy staring at *something,* which will be discussed soon and not even paying attention
to the action that's going on in the meantime. Suddenly we're thrust 12 (CHECK) hours in the past
and the story begins from where stories usually start, in its beginning.

### Monsaic Lines

The Mudokons Abe rescued enjoy their newfound freedom and try to bid over each other who's able to
tell the tallest tale about his exploits. All seems to be well on the outside, but inside a small
hut, the most unfortunate messiah of Oddworld is facing a crisis. The Shaman, who's a wholly new
character is trying to persuade him to cut the stitches on his mouth as they're naught but a sign of
oppression, but Abe is reluctant as he considers it an heirloom he received from his mother - more
about her later. I have to stop the story here for a second because I'm really confused by the
addition of this new character. They are obviously not the BigFace (who doesn't even show up in the
entirety of the game), but rather someone else. This wouldn't be a problem in itself, but about five
minutes after the introduction in this character they are immediately killed off and will never be
mentioned by anyone ever again. It just confuses me that an entire character was designed, sculpted,
animated and whatnot only to be taken out of the plot before it even properly starts. But let's not
get that ahead of ourselves. The Shaman's death is caused by a sudden fire that the Mudokons start
after they realize their hiding place is discovered and one of them carelessly sets a crate of
SoulStorm Brew on fire. This soon spreads through the entire area and over the Shaman's hut too,
which collapses under the flames, killing its inhabitant. Abe pays surprisingly little heed to this
violent death and then begins his own escape from the inferno. One of my first thoughts after
this scene was: "What happened to the natives?" Back in Abe's Oddysee (or if you prefer New 'n'
Tasty), the Lines were full of native Mudokons who practiced chanting or defended the place using
slingshots. Obviously, I'm not asking how come they didn't defend the place from Molluck's Sligs,
but I consider it weird that other than this one new Shaman, we don't even meet anybody who's native
to the area, they all just fell into a plot hole and disappeared from the face of the world.

One way or another Abe escapes from the flames and then meets the Messenger, we've seen running
around in an earlier cutscene. I don't mind the basic concept of this guy, but the way he was
executed leaves a really bad taste in my mouth. As we later learn SoulStorm Brew kills you after two
days if you don't drink it and even before that it causes a sickness that all but paralyses the
afflicted. And yet this guy was able to run from Necrum Mines all the way to the Monsaic Lines
without succumbing to the Brew? Through a sweltering desert? With a gunshot wound?! Of course
suspension of disbelief is a given, but this is not something one can just overlook. By all means
this guy shouldn't be able to talk or anything, but rather dead meat. And yet he can hand over a
package to Abe just fine along with delivering a cryptic message about how soon everyone will know
his name and whatnot. Then finally logic catches up with him and he croaks. The package? An amulet
containing a vaguely Egyptian themed bug (later revealed by Lorne Lanning on Twitter to be an
"ancient royal queen bee") and a map of Mudos, the continent the series happens on. With these
valuable plot devices in hand, Abe continues his escape into the ominously titled Ruins.

### The Ruins

The Ruins is a rocky area containing not much but withered trees and ancient buildings. The looks of
this area is surprising to me. In the intro we saw that the Monsaic Lines is surrounded by a desert,
with sand in every direction as far as one can see, yet this place is a rocky wasteland with nary a
speck of sand anywhere. This makes it feel quite detached from the previous area. Regardless, Abe
faces a new danger in this place in the form of Molluck himself, who intends to blast him to the
next world using mortar shells fired from his blimp. Now, Molluck wanting to kill Abe in itself
makes perfect sense, he himself is a fugitive on the run who wants to prove his innocence, but I
can't understand his methods. If he blows Abe to bits using a rocket then who'll believe his
stories, it's as good as giving himself up.

### The Funicular

This area is fairly story-light, so there is not that much to say about it, Abe ultimately evades
Molluck's clutches by escaping into a tunnel where the blimp can't follow him. He soon ends up in an
abandoned mining town, which is very reminiscent of Stranger's Wrath. He soon meets some Mudokon
workers whom all suffer from a mysterious ailment, whose cause is obvious to any fan of the
series. It's the Brew, or rather its absence. Abe is soon tasked by these sick Mudokons to find some
very specific (but thankfully all in arms reach) ingredients to craft an antidote that might cure
them. I have to be honest here: I hate this scene. While one could reasonably make an argument that
it makes thematic sense that natural ingredients can fix an artificial tool of oppression, the way
it is executed is extremely meh. Abe collects some (literal) crap and then feeds it to the Mudokons
who suddenly become perfectly well without a single sign of exhaustion or whatever. This left no
place for character growth for Abe, nor any interesting trials or tribulations to face. If we look
back to Exoddus, Abe had to face two extremely dangerous areas to earn the approval of the ancestral
spirits, who only then were willing to bless him with the power to free the Mudokons from the grasp
of the horrible drink. Before that you could do nothing but leave them be as they clutched their
heads in pain. Long story short, it had weight because this plot point wasn't resolved in ten
seconds flat.

Well anyways, Abe using his magical mystery cure helps all the sick Mudokons in the area and then
moves on and helps out his other escaped friends too. This is where we meet Alf and Stoopy (remember
this character, he will be extremely important later), whom tell him that he needs to hijack a
train. The reason for this, while justifiable, aren't ever really made clear, nor how they knew
there is a station nearby with a train that could be hijacked. One could I suppose make an argument
that Toby told them since he apparently "swiped the manuals years ago," based on Alf's retelling,
but to me this feels a bit weak. Regardless we soon arrive to Phat Station.

### Phat Sation

Aside from being a refuelling station we learn practically nothing about this place and aside from a
few Youtuber-dubbed radio casts that retread things we already knew there is no new lore we learn
about here. Abe eventually reaches the end of the station and jumps aboard a train that just started
to depart. Molluck, who just arrived to the scene angrily notes the fact that the blimp is incapable
of following the train at full speed - which is weird considering all the flying Sligs whom chase
the train around in the intro movie, why doesn't he just send some after him? Either way he just
instructs his chauffeur to take them to the next area, which turns out to be Slig Barracks.

But before this can happen we finally meet our three (or arguably 1+2) protagonists in a beautifully
rendered cutscene. We have Abe, introduction not necessary; Alf, whom Abe rescued from RuptureFarms
and acts like the primary surface on which Abe bounces his ideas off from; and finally Toby (also
rescued from RF based on his attire), who well frankly has basically no reason to exist in the
plot. It's not even that he's an unlikable character, to everyone's surprise he basically
disappointed us in a very positive way, but other than being "the guy who drives the train," and
every once in a while commenting something related to the lore, he does basically nothing. Which is
a huge shame, because he could have easily been the [one sane
man](https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/OnlySaneMan) or an audience surrogate who asks
questions that wouldn't sound believable from either Abe's or Alf's mouth.

After discussing the weird Egyptian bug for a bit, Abe is told to go to the Barracks and shut off
the communication lines so that factories further ahead can't be alerted about their shenanigans and
play a tape that he snatched from a dead Mudokon back in the Ruins.

### Slig Barracks

Ah the Barracks... Few areas evoke a sense of nostalgia from as it does. The music, the backgrounds,
Dripik himself, it all comes together as a tight package that makes the whole place come
together. And as one might expect from a lengthy intro like this, Soulstorm does away with most of
this and delivers a sub-par experience. Now, I don't wish to hold back credit where its due, the
area is still very recognizable and has some of the charm of the original's, but I feel like it just
doesn't come together as nicely. There is no militaristic beat blaring in the background, nor
Mudokon shaped training dummies and worst of all, no Dripik! Of course the Goofy General couldn't
have been in the game in his original form as he was way sillier than what belongs in the Darkest
Game Yet TM. But the fact that he doesn't even have a replacement, something like a disgruntled /
disinterested general, who hates how quiet things are or hell, even a head Slig, who is basically
like all the other schmucks but has fancier pants and a hat (making for some more subtle, yet still
existing humor) is really disheartening.

Regardless Abe eventually arrives in the communication tower where he shuts off communications, then
uses a convenient tape player right next to him to play the tape. And the contents of the tape have
shocked... literally no one. On it the Brewmaster explains how his Brew is the ultimate employment
retainer as it keeps performance up but kills the consumer if they don't drink it for two days. Now,
I've been a fan for many-many years, so I obviously have no clue how surprising this would be for a
new fan, but seeing how pivotal the brew is (it's in the title after all), I'd be surprised if this
was a huge revelation to anyone. Abe can't stand around shocked for too long though as the world's
worst aiming Slig appears and chases him out. How he evades the Slig is not really detailed, leaving
it up to one's interpretation. My idea is that Abe simply laid a plot hole on the ground which the
unsuspecting Slig fell into and was thus neutralized.

Armed with the knowledge that the Brew is bad, Abe returns to the train and informs Alf and Toby,
who take it surprisingly well. This is as good a time as ever to mention that these three characters
have exactly zero conflicts with each other aside from that one time Alf is banging on the door
while Abe is staring at the bee pendant. I assume the reason for this is out of respect for the
[namesake](https://oddworld.fandom.com/wiki/Alfred_Gamble) of Alf, but this puts a great dampener on
exploring just who these characters are. Anyway, with their newfound knowledge the trio decides to
depart for Necrum Mines, where the mysterious Keeper resides. For some reason they are all unwilling
to go to this place, but it's never elaborated why. My guess is due to the fact that it's a boneyard
or due to all the dangerous machinery, but with only a throwaway sentence to go on, it's a bit hard
to know for sure.

### Necrum

Remember the iconic scene from the beginning of Exoddus, with Abe and his friends running after the
train that just arrived to Necrum Mines? Now that the trio has really got a train, surely OWI would
recreate it with a modern spin... Wrong, we never even see the Mines from the outside, hell, in-game
it's never even really called Necrum Mines, just Necrum. As one might reasonably expect from this,
there is no jungle this time. Necrum is practically a huge, blue cave, the most boring area of
Exoddus extrapolated to be several hours long.

But before Abe even arrives to the place, we're introduced to a new Glukkon, Morguer, owner and
leader of the mining operation in Necrum. Why are they mining? Aside from a few throwaway sentences
from Abe, no one knows. Anyways, we get to hear a phone call between the boss and one of his Slig
underlings, who informs him that communication lines are down and that rumors started spreading
about revolting slaves, to which he starts to wonder whether the Brew is failing or not. Remember
this, because it'll be important later.

Other than navigating through some really fancy drills, devices and pistons, not much lore related
happens - aside form a few additional radio prompts that reiterate things we already know - until
Abe finally reaches the deepest parts of the mines... The Sanctum.

#### Sanctum

Suddenly the landscape changes and we're introduced to a very different area. The Sanctum is a
gigantic hive with hundreds of withered and dead Mudokons entombed in its walls. As Abe navigates
the area he finally meets the Keeper, who turns out to be a she. Now, I'm not bringing this up
because of some hidden sexist agenda of mine, rather because through its over twenty years of
existence, female characters in Oddworld have consciously not really been a thing (except for Jo
Mamma in Stranger, but that's a story for another time). The reason for this is because as it's been
explained time and time again, Mudokons (and well most species for that reason) work similarly to
bees. There is one queen per hive, who is responsible for reproduction, while the rest act as
caretakers, gatherers, etc. And yet as it turns out from a Tweet by Lorne Lanning, this Keeper
figure is in fact an infertile queen who has been "discarded" at a young age. So I guess this is a
thing now. As we learn from her, Abe needs something called the "Fragon's Eye" to unlock some sort
of hidden knowledge, which he'll need to accomplish his goals and we also learn that the husks
inside the hive cells are also previous Keepers, whose job is to keep the true history and origin of
the Mudokons. Now the game doesn't really elaborate on this, but I'm pretty sure it's [the
Schism](/schism) that's being discussed here.

Armed with this knowledge Abe is then sent down into the bowels of Necrum to face the Sleeches and
retrieve the artifact. Not much story related happens here and Abe eventually finds the Eye that he
then returns to the Keeper and is thus granted the knowledge. And here comes a major slap from the
story: **We are never granted a peek into just what Abe learns,** aside from like two throwaway
sentences. This to me totally undermines this scene. I'm sure some feel catharsis from seeing Abe's
torture, but I personally just rolled my eyes seeing how 

### FeeCo Depot

#### Yards

### SoulStorm Brewery
