---
title: "Half the heart, but twice the flavor?"
summary: "My thoughts about Abe's Exoddus in a long-form blogpost."
---

# Half the heart, but twice the flavor?

Of all the games in the Oddworld series there is perhaps none as celebrated and well liked as Abe's
Exoddus. Fans almost unanimously love both the plot and gameplay of AE, citing its refinement of the
prequel's mechanics and its memorable moments. It might not come as surprise, but I too love the
game, however, going against the norm a bit I do not consider it the best in the series as that
title belong to Abe's Oddysee. In this post I hope to explain my reasoning along with some general
recap about the game and other interesting tidbits that might come to my mind.

## The Gameplay

Since Exoddus came out just nine months after Oddysee, it's no surprise that the two's gameplay is
quite similar to each other. However, AE brings some really cool new mechanics and features to the
table, which we will now check out:

### Improved GameSpeak

When one goes back to AO from AE, this one is perhaps one of the most jarring changes as in Exoddus
you have a ton of tools to wrangle the Mudokons just the way you want. From obvious things like
deciding whether you only want the attention of a single one with a "Hello" or all of them with the
"All o' ya" to more obscure techniques like using Abe's fart to make them take one step towards the
direction you want them to go.

Some argue - perhaps rightfully - that AE's GameSpeak would ruin AO's puzzles, however, it just
simply feels so awkward to only direct one Mudokon at a time, whom you can't even tell to stop
listening to you. The absence of this stumbling block makes Exoddus' NPC interactions a far more
enjoyable experience and this alone I think makes it a far more approachable beginner experience.

### Emotions

Such a simple concept and yet it immediately puts a huge twist on your otherwise oh-so-obedient
followers. The fact that your fellow Mudokons can become your quasi-enemies by pulling levers or
turning wheels that activate traps organically gives you a choice of how to approach the situation.
In some cases it's very easy to just kill them using a possessed Slig or a grenade, but then you're
locked out of the perfect playthrough and perhaps even on your way to the bad ending. Thus you have
to balance whether the short term gains help you more than the long term ones.

Of course the murder of Mudokons is further disincentivized by the fact that if too many of them die
on the same screen the rest get so depressed they will attempt to commit suicide by repeatedly
bashing their heads in. Ah games in the nineties...

I also really like how hyperactive Wired Mudokons act, despite the fact that at the end of the day
none of the characters have a huge amount of actions they can take. They say constraints breed
creativity and this is a prime example of just that.

The only "emotion" (though I suppose one should really call it state) I don't really like is the
Muds suffering from Brew hangovers. They're functionally identical to depressed Mudokons, but you
have to find the McGuffin healing rings to interact with them. Thematically it's great, the brew has
such a bad effect on them that they become completely docile and even more harmless, but in-game
it's not very interesting. To be honest, I'm not sure how I would have changed them, especially
considering the limitations of the era, but I think they could have had more mechanics.

### Flying Sligs

Flying Sligs are a great addition to the roster of enemies. Unlike normal Sligs who are mostly bound
to a single screen, flying Sligs can chase you over several screens and can easily kill Abe if the
player isn't careful enough. Controlling them also leads to fun puzzles as you aren't bound by
gravity anymore and thus the game can challenge you using much more vertical gauntlets that would be
impossible with the normal earth-bound Slig variant.

This isn't as much of an 'issue' rather just something I would have loved to see, but it's such a
shame you aren't allowed to turn Sligs back into their pantless version. Imagine if select puzzles
required you to smartly switch between the two variants to reach places where one can do something
but the other can't. All the puzzle pieces are already there so it's a bit of a pity that OWI didn't
take the last step.

### The Minecart

As I've touched upon in my previous posts, Oddworld's main "hidden" mechanic is the system of
empowerment and disempowerment. That is that Abe is a fundamentally weak character that dies in a
single hit, but he can possess his enemies. He has no weapons, but he can sneak. He has no way of
hurting certain enemies, but he can operate machinery to save himself. The minecart follows this
dichotomy. Abe is a weak character, but once he enters the Minecart the table is turned and suddenly
it's the Sligs who panic and run around before eventually being squashed.

There is an even greater emphasis on this as just before you're allowed to rampage through Necrum
Mines, you need to complete a not-especially hard, but still tense gauntlet of motion-scanners and
UXBs. The fact that you can't even leave in the minecart without tripping the alarm silently signals
that the time of being sneaky is over and you're free to just smash through. This is, I believe, one
of the major reasons why many people have extremely fond memories of this section. The game is also
careful enough not to devalue the experience as there are only two minecarts in the entire game, one
in Necrum Mines and the other in Bonewerkz, thus it's always a treat instead of becoming just
another mechanic.

### Fleeches

Everyone's favorite creatures! While Oddysee had its own annoying critter in the shape of bats (whom
are entirely absent in Exoddus), the sequel takes it one step further and turns them into a panic
inducing, tense encounter. The game utilizes several different factors, - like their shrill squeeks,
their worm-like shape and even the fact that they eat Abe whole without any problem - to evoke both a
sense of disgust and perhaps even a slight sense of primal fear from the player.

When I first played Exoddus at the ripe age of 7-8, I was never able to get further than Necrum,
because the Fleeches simply terrified me so much. Nowadays of course I'm a far bit less squeamish
and a lot of the areas I've found difficult previously proved to be really not that much of a
challenge if you approach them with a cool head, however, there are still some places, especially in
secret areas, where I feel quite a bit of tension as I try to narrowly evade them and get the rest
of the Mudokons out alive.

### Spiritlocks and Invisibility

These are functionally identical to the Flintlocks in Abe's Oddysee, you have to activate a given
amount of them before proceeding. They aren't particularly interesting, but nor do they commit any
huge crimes, so I'm mostly ambivalent about them. I do really like the fact that before Abe opens
them, they thrash around to show the spirit inside desperately trying to escape and it's also kinda
nice that the fact that the doors even open is because they're helping Abe out in return for his
assistance.

Amusingly enough, Spiritlocks weren't originally intended to be part of the game, instead Abe would
have had to direct zombie Mudokons (so called Mudombies) to their resting place before he was
allowed to proceed. Not much remains about how this would have worked in-game, so I can't really
make assumptions, but I imagine OWI either run out of disk space or simply didn't find them
intuitive or interesting enough to be included.

Some of these locks also temporarily turn Abe invisible. I like how tense these sections are.
Usually you become visible just as soon as you get to safety and if you accidentally mess up
something it's easy to start panicing, which can lead to hilarious and/or frustrating deaths. I have
nothing against this powerup, hell I really like the fact that instead of a timer you can tell when
Abe is going to be revealed simply by looking at him. My only 'complaint' I guess is the fact that
there aren't any more powers these locks grant. Perhaps a power that activates all mechanisms and
then the player would need to balance activating and deactivating doors that both let them proceed,
but also allow enemies to get closer.

### Extended Possession

While in Oddysee you were only able to possess Sligs (and Bells, but that's not very interactive),
here aside from a few exceptions if you see it, you can posssess it. I really like that the mechanic
was expanded in such a way. Every species you can possess feels and plays different and also ties
really nicely into the empowerment/disempowerment mechanic mentioned above. Scrabs have their
powerspin, Paramites can talk to each other and operate simple machinery, flying Sligs can fly (duh)
and finally the Glukkons can order Sligs around. Every character has its strenghts as most of them
possess some sort of weapon or a method of opening up a new path that Abe alone couldn't, but on the
other hand most of them eventually face a challenge that only Abe can solve, like a door, a lever,
etc.

I also like the visual storytelling of Abe not blowing up Scrabs and Paramites when he lets go of
the possession. After all they are his holy creatures, so killing them would be very dissonant.
Similarly controlling the Glukkons is an amazing experience where all bets are off and your enemies
suddenly become your best friends for a while and with every of these sections starting and ending
with a hilarious cutscene, it's no one's surprise that these sections are the favorite of many. But
more on them later.

My only problem with this mechanic with is that some of the characters don't really get enough
screen time. For instance you hardly have the chance to possess Scrabs and Paramites and even when
you do, it mostly happens in extremely constrained environments, where it is basically impossible to
lose the character you control as there are no real hazards. Even when you encounter Fleeches, they
run away from you and only meakly attack when they are cornered, leaving only the most careless
players to lose their controlled Scrab or Paramite.

### Healing rings

Honestly... I can take or leave them. In the original game completing the two trials allowed Abe to
turn into an all destroying demigod. Completing Exoddus' two trials lets him make other Mudokons
fart. It's understandable from a storytelling standpoint, but still very much not as interesting or
satisfying to use. At least I suppose the Shrykull makes a comeback so it could be worse, but I
still kind of felt let down, especially since the cutscene in which Abe gets this power sets it up
to be something way cooler.

> **Weirdos:** We can give you powers... / Yeah! Spirit powers! / Yeah!

This problem is exacerbated by the fact that in the previous game you were able to get a way more
powerful ring, the bomb activating Red ring from simply whistling to some random Mudokons a bit,
while here you have to take an ardous journey.

### SoulStorm Brew and 'Evil' Farts

Perhaps my favorite mechanic in the entire game. The sheer absurdity of making Abe drink a brew made
from his own peers, only to promptly also make him fart the mixture out which you then possess (have
you ever thought about the morbid implications of this?) and blow your enemies up makes the whole
thing sound like something out of a bad joke about the crassness of video games. And yet here it
works and feels almost "natural," due to how well it conforms into the system of empowerment.
Enemies ignore you, you can even blow them up and you're limited only by the frankly very generous
time limit before the fart self-destructs.

The timing too is very well executed as while the brew itself is introduced extremely early in the
story (right at the end of Necrum Mines), you aren't given a chance of trying out the stuff yourself
until you finished your little trip to Necrum and the Vaults. However, once you've done that the
game immediately throws it in your face in the very second screen of FeeCo, giving you ample
opportunity to experiment - and goof off - with your newfound superpower.

You may have noticed that I've called these explosive farts "evil farts" in the title of this
section. I can assure you this is not one of my own weird antics, rather the actual name the game
refers to these in its code. This has very little bearing on the game itself, but I found it amusing
enough to mention in this section.

### The Greeters

Greeters are a nice spin on the common trope of killer robots. Functionally they're hardly different
than the normal motion scanners, as usually tripping either results in your death, however, there is
of course the obvious difference of being able to kill the Greeters using a possessed Slig. Their
glitchy voice and eerie smile makes their design iconic in the eyes of the fandom.

I honestly don't have much criticism about them as I like them a lot, perhaps they weren't used as
often as they could have, but arguably their role in the game is near perfect.

### Possessable Glukkons

Another lovely feature of the game at least in the gameplay sense. In the original outside cutscenes
Glukkons only showed up for the ten or so seconds while you - quite literally - dropped in to their
meeting and obliterated them using your fancy lightning powers, while here you're given far more
opportunities to use them for your own exploits.

It's really nice to be finally bossing around the Sligs who are for the most part your sworn
enemies, ordering them to pull levers for you or kill each other. It's a sort of dark twist on Abe
ordering the Mudokons around to help him out.

Aside from the Junior Executive Glukkons, which all look the same, you're also given the chance to
control three out of the four main antagonists of the game, which I really like. All three has their
own gimmick that ultimately still uses the skillset of the Glukkons, but requires very different
approaches. Let me elaborate: In Phleg's case, it's very easy to reach the room in which he resides
and take control of him. However, your challenge has only just begun when you do that as you have to
navigate him through a hard gauntlet of several Slog kennels and mercilessly approaching drills. In
stark opposition, reaching Dripik is not exactly an easy feat. You have to dodge several Sligs, two
Greeters and even dodge quite a few mines. But once you've proven yourself, the game pats you on the
back by giving you control over a virtually unlimited supply of Sligs and presents you with a bunch
of organically comical scenes as you order your underlings around whom try so hard to follow your
commands that they inadvertedly run into their own doom. Aslik's section resembles Dripik's more
than Phleg's, as you have to do a lot of stealth using Abe before you can finally possess the big
man himself (who valiantly hid himself in his toilet) and leisurely stroll over to the teleporter
two screens to the left and activate the creatively named Security Fone.

## The Locations

Exoddus features a lot of new locations, some more inspired than others. It's certainly possible
that what I'll write here won't align with your opinion and that's alright. They are opinions after
all. With this out of the way, let us proceed with the locations themselves:

### Necrum Mines

Starting immediately with a controversial opinion, I don't really like Necrum Mines. I find it a far
more boring area than say RuptureFarms, which had a bunch of animated backgrounds, a lot of visual
storytelling in the form of posters, decals and similar. The Mines simply feel... boring and empty.
Everything is just a bunch of rocks, with some machinery and scaffolding thrown in haphazardly. In
the intro cutscene Abe and co. enters this majestic building, hiding who knows what sort of secrets,
but instead of anything resembling a tomb, we're lead into a desolate, blue wasteland.

There are a few things I admittedly like, for instance the motion scanners, which slightly resemble
stereotypical private investigators and of course everyone's favorite, the boiler section, but as a
whole I find this area the most forgettable in the entire game and the one I have the least fond
memories of.

### Necrum

Ah the jungle. While it's not my favorite area by a long shot, I still really like it. Both the fact
that it's a place where you can feel the effect of the exploitation on your skin as it is literally
a dying forest and the ruins of an ancient Mudokon burial really make this area feel mystical and a
bit depressing to look at, but in a good way. The vaults in the background too evoke a foreboding
atmosphere along with the droning soundtrack and the fact that other than the Fleeches you do not
encounter anyone alive, friend or foe.

Arguably the area feels a bit short, but to be honest this doesn't really bother me. The point of it
is to act like the Monsaic Lines in Abe's Oddysee, it is a central "hub" from which you can visit
the Vaults before returning to the now-defunct Necrum Mines.

There is one thing I exceptionally like about this area, because it really shows how much care the
artists put into their work and that is the tombstones lying around all over the place. If you pay a
bit of attention, you can see that the top of these tombstones fit into two categories. One with
"horns" and one with a sort of "loop" on top. The two appear pretty much evenly, yet once you enter
the Vaults you will notice that you only see either one kind or the other. What this means is that
the two tribes whose vaults you can find here had different tombstone designs and in the area
between the vaults you can find the resting places of members of both tribes. I love small details
like this, because while they hardly affect the gameplay and you can be easily forgiven if you never
even noticed this, once you do the world just feels a bit more alive (even though we're talking
about dead creatures.)

### The Vaults

The Vaults are the absolute low point of the game in my honest opinion. They're bland, boring and
even Lorne Lanning himself admitted, that they're largely rehashes of the temples from Abe's
Oddysee.

There is however one thing I really appreciate about both Vaults that rarely gets mentioned. I'm
talking about the endings of both areas as you can see a weird mix of the Necrum Mines iron
scaffolding and machinery and the natural rock formations of the areas. It's a really nice way of
showcasing the slow encroachment of the native areas by the Glukkons.

#### Mudomo

The Mudomo were the tribe that worshipped the Paramites. Out of the two vaults, I like this one less
than the other, mostly due to its really boring design, due to the fact that it's deep underground
there is hardly anything in the backgrounds and the whole area is very desolate. The puzzles too
while somewhat interesting aren't ever that exciting. I honestly struggle to remember the whole
area, without looking it up.

#### Mudanchee

The Mudanchee-vault is of course for the Scrabs. While I'm also not on a very high opinion about
this one, it at least has nice backdrops with the jungle contrasting the reddish walls of the vault,
along with the hundreds of gravestones in the background. It's a sort of visual storytelling point
that unlike the Mudomo-vault which has hardly any graves, this one is chock full of them, showing
how much more vicious this tribe likely was compared to the other.

### Necrum Mines Destroyed

I know this "area" is literally just two screens, but I still find it important to point out how
nice it is that OWI took the chance to show the extent of destruction Abe caused by blowing up the
boiler, along with the situational comedy of everything being destroyed, except those few Mudokons
that suffered from Brew-addiction.

The game also tests your thinking (and perhaps patience) since if you just do the motions you can
really easily leave those few Muds behind, even though you can easily save them if you just lead
them back to the previous screen after activating the well to FeeCo.

### FeeCo Depot

A fan favorite area, FeeCo (which believe it or not derives from the word "fecal") is the enormous
train station from which the player can approach every other major location in the game. FeeCo
marries the art-deco style with the trademark Oddworld gigantism as seen in some of the backgrounds
where as far as the eye can see one can spot crates of things waiting since forever to be shipped.
This along with the admittedly very cool trains makes FeeCo a very memorable area. Albeit I'm sure
visiting the area several times also helps with that.

It also introduces a bunch of new mechanics, including the Brew and Greeters both of which I've
already talked about above. And of course we can't forget about the fact that it has a locked door
for both RuptureFarms (to preserve continuity) and a door towards Vykkers Labs. I prefer this
greatly to New 'n' Tasty's in-game advertising, because even though it in a sense advertises Munch's
Oddysee, it's far less obtrusive and even builds intrigue as the player is left to guess what sort
of location this vaguely menacing name hides.

This is arguably a silly point, but I always found this random potted plant very amusing. Like,
there is literally no plantlife in any other industrialist location and yet here you can find some
random sapling.

### Slig Barracks

The Barracks are one of my favorite areas in the entire game. Nearly every background has something
very interesting going on and the puzzles too are very varied. The Art of Oddworld Inhabitants
describes the Barracks as a haphazardly built military complex that was nonetheless never used for
an actual conflict. It uses trench-imagery mixed with a very striking shanty-town of tents in the
background. Everything is rusted away, full of jagged edges, barbed wire and other things that evoke
a sense of a hard life. I'm especially a fan of the screen where you have to hide behind shooting
practice targets resembling sneaking Mudokons.

It's also the first area where you can possess a main Glukkon (unless you chose to visit Bonewerkz
first, but work with me) and as I've described it in the gameplay section it's an amazing
change of pace and a really nice treat to top off a great area.
