---
title: "[HEAVY SPOILERS!] The Sad Storm of My Soul"
summary: "Soulstorm-critique"
---

# This Sad Storm of My Soul

## A Soulstorm Critique

I am deeply conflicted about what I should say about this game. On one hand, the fan in me is happy
that after 15 years we're finally seeing something new. Yet, my happiness is not genuine. The game
is bleeding from a thousand paper-cuts and most of my worst fears about it are vindicated.

Before we start, I'd like to mention for the sake of journalistic integrity and clarity, that I have
received a free review copy from Oddworld Inhabitants. This does not change my opinion about the
game, but I felt like it's necessary to mention. I'd like to thank them again for sending me this
code.

## Methodology

Before we get into the thick of things, I'd like to explain what exactly am I going to do in this
post. I hope with setting clear boundaries. people won't misunderstand my intentions and
circumstances, which could lead to unfortunate impressions I don't wish to propagate.

First and foremost, some people whose world-view sadly consists of "our tribe vs their tribe" have
labelled me a "hater" of the series. Once again I'd debunk these claims. I am very much a fan of
Oddworld, it's just that OWI's recent products has not _felt_ like Oddworld to me. The reason why I
am a negative voice in a choir of positivity is largely because I have spent a long time
contemplating on what made the originals great and I felt like neither New 'n' Tasty nor Soulstorm
really grasped these elusive principles. I won't call my behaviour "tough love" or anything
pretentious like that, but I swear everything I do is ultimately based on trying to help the series
and its fanbase.

With this out of the way, here's how much I've seen of the game currently:

- I have reached the train level in my own playthrough.
- I watched a streamer play through the game.
- I also watched all endings of the game and will comment them in this post. As these literally give
  away the end of the story, this is your last chance of leaving unspoiled.

## A short walkthrough of what I've experienced

In this section, I'd recap the things I've noticed while playing and comment on how I've found things.

### The bumpy start

I am a Linux user, which means I am not able to play the game natively as it's Windows only. This
doesn't mean I am totally locked out though, as there is an "emulation layer" of sorts called WINE,
that allows Windows programs (including games, like Soulstorm) to run on this platform too. The
reason why I'm mentioning this is because I've run into several problems with the game, some of
which were caused by my unorthodox method of playing. To be fair towards the game, I'm not going to
chalk these up as the game's fault, but they have regardless soured my experience a bit. I am unable
to watch cutscenes in-game and I am hardly able to keep 80 FPS even though my PC parts are more than
strong enough to play the game properly.

Regardless, after some experimentation I was able to start the game only to be met with the world's
most bland title screen. Someone immediately commented that this reminds them deeply of FNAF3's
title screen and I couldn't help but begrudgingly agree. Gone are the mural-decorated mystical holes
Abe sticks his head out of, instead we simply have a black background with nothing but Abe staring
right into our soul. The menu is otherwise entirely functional, albeit I do consider it a very weird
move that the game's difficulty settings are hidden behind two additional sub-menus and the fact
that you can't move around using the arrow keys and have to use WASD.

### The Intro - Monsaic Lines

The game opens with a complete lack of the original iconic riff and camera pan, that has been
present in both AO and AE. Imagine we saw a camera pan of Monsaic from the outside with Abe saying
something like this:

> **Abe:** This is the Monsaic Lines. Long ago the Mudokons carved this place in honour of our
> sacred animals. Now it provides refuge for those rescued from RuptureFarms.

Of course I'm not story-writer, so this might sound a bit off, the point is an awesome callback like
this could have easily been included without any sort of shoehorning necessary and would have
resonated greatly with fans of both AO and AE, and NnT.

Instead we start with a quick in-medias-res of the game's end and a glimpse at SoulStorm Brewery
only to be transported back to the very beginning. It's not bad, but I feel like for someone who
never played Exoddus seeing the Brewery might not really evoke that much emotion. They might not
even know why Alf is wowed, other than that it's a big building.

Anyway, we're soon introduced to a new shaman character, who tries his hardest to convince Abe to
let go of his stitches, but he is unwilling to part with them, because it's the only thing reminding
him of "her." The personage of this "her" is of course obvious to anyone who has moved inside the
Oddworld-circles for a while. It refers to the Mudokon queen Sam. I'd be happy at the fact that she
is mentioned, albeit from what I could see from the other cutscenes in the game, other than vague
mentions of her, she doesn't actually appear or has any relevant role in the game other than being a
future goal for Abe to reach in a hypothetical later game, thus it really doesn't feel like much
more than nostalgia-bait for old fans.

Moments later disaster strikes and the newly established Shaman - who for some reason isn't the
BigFace, who for some other reason doesn't even appear in the whole game - is promptly squashed by
some burning debris. I couldn't take this scene seriously. Not only did I not care about this
Shaman due to the fact that they're killed of moments after their introduction (they weren't even
given a name), but also because they literally stood still and didn't even try to escape or hex
themselves out of the tent. This made me think this will be a subversion and they're going to appear
later in a different cutscene, but no. This is their death and some talented artist wasted a bunch
of time on an amazing model that was used for five whole minutes.

The second issue strikes me right away: We are in Monsaic Lines. Think about one word that describes
the place as it appears either in Abe's Oddysee or New 'n' Tasty. For me this word is "lush." The
place is full of moss, curious plants, native imagery and such. Here it's a weird, desolate, brown
area that has none of the characteristic things seen in the old incarnation of it. Not only is the
moss and greenery gone, so are the Scrab and Paramite statues along with those weird long spears.

_As I walk through the valley of the shadow of death  
I take a look at the sights and realize there's no green left  
And that's not perfect for an old fan like me...  
You know I love fancy things like consistency._

The game then introduces the basic concepts to you using story stones. I found it a bit funny that
to reach the story stone that explains how to move around, you already have to move. Obviously
anyone playing games will know (or figure out) how to move around, but it's pretty funny regardless.
Not much happens in this level, there are some scripted setpieces, pillars falling down, flying
Sligs sweeping in and such, cool, but nothing too ground-breaking.

We're also introduced to the frequently mentioned flame mechanics. It's not that I don't like it,
because who doesn't like to play with fire, but the way it is currently implemented is quite
awkward. Sometimes you can put out large fires with a single bottle of water, sometimes you need 5-6
and the game doesn't really make it clear why this is the case. I'm inclined to think this is a bug,
but regardless it does break the flow when you have to lob bottles like a moron just to be able to
move on.

Abe does find a single statue that resembles him and pulsates mysteriously. The significance - if
there is any - of this statue is never detailed, but I assume it just shows that Abe is important.
We quickly leave this area behind never to mention it again and follow out into the not too
creatively named "Ruins."

### Brown and Grey - The Ruins

But before Abe can leave, we are presented with another cutscene. A Mudokon worker from Necrum, who
somehow traversed an entire desert alone, on foot, with a gaping, bleeding wound in his stomach
finally reaches Monsaic with a special package for Abe. This package is a map of Eastern-Mudos (the
continent the game takes place on) and a necklace containing what appears to be a larva of some
sort. The dying worker explains how Abe has become a sort of messiah-like figure for the rest of the
slaves and that he needs to save them, before finally dying.

I have no fundamental issues with the idea of this cutscene. It's drama in its simplest form, a
dying character doing something meaningful in their last moments, we've all seen a thousand forms of
this before, but regardless, I like it. What I don't like is how improbable his whole journey was.
First, as I've said he was able to traverse a desert with a mortal wound, even though Abe and the
others need a train to do that effectively. And considering the Brew kills you in two days even if
you're in top-notch shape, this means he wasn't even going slowly.

The other problem is with the pacing of the scene. Instead of giving the package to Abe after
recognizing him and then finally dying, the Mudokon goes on to caress and fiddle with Abe in a
frankly extremely awkward and uncomfortable scene, before providing him with vague instructions and
finally dying. I understand the reasons more or less, OWI wanted to characterize Abe more and giving
him more chances to act is a good way of that on paper, but it is so dragged out that drama turns to
awkwardness, which in turn becomes unintentionally humorous. Eventually Abe hears a noise and
decides to leg it, without even closing the eyelids of his poor, dead peer.

The level that follows this cutscene is everything I don't want to see in an Oddworld game.
Everything is the same colour of brown and grey, without any interesting background elements or
anything. Other than a few scrawny trees there is nothing really that the player might find
interesting around these areas. The thing is, desolation is actually not a bad level theme, but
unless it's shown in more things than just a bland, rocky environment it's not going to be
particularly exciting to see.

Consider AE's Necrum Jungle. That place is dying, the trees are yellowing from the wither,
everything is still and quiet, aside from the uncomfortable scurrying of the Fleeches or the violent
rattles of Spirit Locks. And yet you're never bored, because something always catches your
attention, be it the Mudokon-skulls the walkways are decorated with, the dying flora or the
mysterious temples in the background. In Soulstorm there is nothing like that.

The sights aren't the only bland thing as this whole level more or less acts like a second tutorial
area which teaches the player the ropes of possession and reiterates throwing items. The game for
some reason is extremely concerned about the player not knowing how to do stuff, so every 5 minutes
you're sure to find a story stone that gives you extremely obvious advice about what you need to do.
This weird hand-holdy mechanic doesn't go away even hours later when you're already very comfortable
with what you can do and I can't help but wonder why this is. I eventually just decided to
consciously ignore these, because they never provided any sort of lore, just pointless tutorials and
never once felt like I was missing anything. Especially because the game sometimes just pushes its
prompts into your face without any outside input, so at that point why even have the stones.

I'll front-load an important thing I've noticed because it's honestly one of my biggest gripes in
the game: **Possession is not rewarding any more.** I have talked previously about the system of
Empowerment and Disempowerment in Oddworld, which is an intrinsic duality in all previous games: Abe
is usually weak, but after you possess Sligs or get the Shrykull or possess a head Glukkon, the
tables turn. Simply put, I do not feel this in Soulstorm. Abe is a powerhouse. Whether you play
non-lethally or lethally he has tools that make him way more dangerous than any Slig could hope to
be. Rock candy is basically a non-lethal gun that you can spam to stun-lock any Slig, Fizzy PoP
being an AoE version of the same concept. You can start giant fires using Brew, tie up Sligs using
bouncing balls, etc. The point here is, having a gun afterwards doesn't really feel rewarding any
more, because you do not feel empowered, rather your otherwise versatile toolbox is taken away for a
shoddy gun that needs reloading after two seconds of firing. Sligs don't even reload when idle so
I've had my possessed gunslingers die several times due to their clip being almost empty when I
started the firefight.

After a rather uneventful trek through the brown wastelands we're met with the game's first "boss"
so to speak: Molluck's blimp. This section of the game has caused much headache for a lot of players
due to its inconsistencies. As the player navigates the map, the blimp offloads Sligs that try to
intercept him and also bombards the area with heavy-hitting rockets. Not a bad idea, but due to the
fact that these rockets have absolutely no telegraphing and likely due to bugs can hit the player
even behind cover, this section becomes quite frustrating and chaotic. There are several sections
where the player has to possess a Slig to clear the path before themselves, but many of these have
no obvious safe spots from the blimp so while you're trying to win the shootouts, you also need to
pay attention to yourself, which isn't as easy as it sounds when the camera leaves you behind.

Once the player finally finishes this section, whether due to sheer luck or skill, they can progress
to the next area,

### Sorrow Valley

The Valley is an area I have mixed feelings about. On one hand I do like the rusting, abandoned
mining town feel of the place, reminds me a lot of Stranger's Wrath, on the other hand due to the
fact that it is abandoned, not much happens in the backgrounds. Most of the machinery is static,
even the elevators and transport platforms Abe takes. Despite having huge, prominent cogwheels and
similar, these don't move even when the machine itself is active.

## The Plot

Soulstorm's story is confusing to say at least. Not in the sense that it's hard to follow, quite the
opposite, rather that it feels like half of it was cut.

My confusion starts from the very beginning with the new Shaman character. The model was extensively
shown off previously and it is very obvious that the artist put a lot of time and effort into making
the model fleshed out and nice looking... And yet five minutes into the story he's killed off. We
never even get to know the name of this character. One might retort with "Well duh, he's not
important," but then why even introduce a new character? Why not just use the BigFace? Especially
since he could have also received a model update and thus OWI could have shown off how much they
improved in these six years with one more old and beloved character.

The second thing I found really annoying is the fact that Sam was brought up again only to be left
as a vague reference mentioned in the intro and the good ending. If we consider the game only on its
own, it's a plot point that has zero pay-off. And I know the whole plan about the Quintology and
whatnot, but does that really mean the individual games will be full off overarching themes that may
or may not be answered?

Molluck himself is all but reduced to laughing stock. He constantly just chases Abe like a cartoon
villain and makes a total idiot of himself in front of his Slig coach, who's actually became my
favourite character in the game. Interestingly while I have problems with most characters, I feel
like the Sligs were really nailed. While they sadly didn't retain their menacing aura from the old
games, they are at least quite entertaining and much more active participants of the plot than
almost everyone else.
