---
title: "In Odd We Trust...?"
summary: ""
---

# In Odd We Trust...?

It's been close to a year since I last posted on this site. The reason for this largely boils down to two things: For one, nothing was really released in this time that really fit the blog and for two, I simply felt burned out. I never hid the fact that Soulstorm wasn't exactly the game I was hoping it would be, but I ultimately never managed to finish a full post about it. This won't be that. I will touch on Soulstorm, but in this post I largely wish to detail how I personally see the franchise's future.

## "The Historical Revisionism and its consequences have been a disaster for Oddworld fans"

If the reader paid any attention to communication coming from OWI during Soulstorm's development and even occasionally after its release, a recurring theme is the idea that in-fact the series that we grew to love was really a perversion of what was supposed to be the fabled _"Original Vision"_ and really it was always meant to be a five-saga epic about Abe.

> **[PlayStation Magazine (2019):](https://magogonthemarch.wordpress.com/playstation-official-magazine-uk-oddworlds-inhabitants-are-revolting/)** Abe’s games and the wider Oddworld mythos have had an interesting trajectory. Lanning explains the original five-game plan, saying, “Abe’s story arc would span the five games because his evolution from blissful ignorance to awareness to revolutionist takes time. To rush that transformation, and how that transformation effects change in small and large ways, takes time.”

Older fans and the few people who actually bothered to read older interviews immediately began furrowing their brows upon hearing this, as it heavily contradicts what used to be the series' "mythos" for nearly fifteen years:

> **[Lorne Lanning (1997):](https://magogonthemarch.wordpress.com/1997-interviews/interview-with-oddworld-team/)** Abe has his odyssey. The second game will be Munch’s Odyssey. He and Abe work together. The third is Squeek’s— and all three of them will work together. By the time we’re at the fifth game, you’ll be controlling five individual heroes.

What's more, we've even been given the following unexpected quote:

> **[Lorne Lanning (2017):](/egx)** So Exoddus was kind of an emergency game for us. **It was supposed to be the second game in the Oddworld Quintology.** And I had this big vision of what that game was going to be and…
>
> But the reality was was we needed to provide our partner a game in nine months, and that was not our plan. So what happens is the story of Exoddus got reshaped into something that wasn’t really in line with that original vision.

As the editors of the esteemed [Magog on the March](https://magogonthemarch.wordpress.com) point out, this completely contradicts previous statements made about Exoddus:

> **[Paul O' Connor:](https://magogonthemarch.wordpress.com/2018/07/09/soulstorm-what-exoddus-was-supposed-to-be/)** \[Lanning’s\] story plans didn’t include Exoddus, so we had to create a tale that fit ‘inside’ the envisioned continuity. We also didn’t want to do something that was exactly the same as Oddysee, so we opted for a different tone in the story.

> **Lorne Lanning:** Abe’s Exoddus was true to the vision even though we referred to it as a ‘bonus game.’

To resolve this inconsistency the article's author assumed OWI was really talking about Munch under the guise of Exoddus, as the former was [known](/munchrant) to be a far inferior product than originally intended, while the latter to this day continues to be the most beloved game in the series. Now, three years later, we can finally see that this assumption, though a valiant effort, proved to be mostly wrong and Soulstorm is in actuality a weird mix of new plot-threads, reusing parts of Exoddus' plot, and a few distant echoes of cut Munch story-lines.

Considering the fact that we're dealing with slowly twenty-five years of interviews and content, and that we largely only have access to texts intended to market things, it is hard to draw any concrete conclusions from this, but one thing is clear:

Company communication is inconsistent at best, at worst wholly unreliable.

This makes it very hard, if not impossible to know what to expect as a fan, especially if this hypothetical fan isn't hanging on OWI's every word and only occasionally listens in to interviews and similar.

Nothing shows this better than the wildly differing answers we got to whether/when a new game is coming. In June, we were told the following:

> **[Ashley Hackett](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V6QxUby3wD4)**, quoting a question asked by the fanbase: Is there anything going on in the Oddworld Studio? Like are you guys creating the next instalment? Are you guys working on something new?
>
> **Bennie Terry III:** Definitely working on something. Right, I'm nodding my head a lot, because there's, you know, "yes"-es to a lot of that. I can't speak to specifically what it is what genre it is, what style of play, but what I can say is that there's something really cool that has a unique visual signature to it that is Oddworld through and through, but builds from character first
>
> \[...\]
>
> Well, let me just say though I think there's a change coming in that space. Right, where generally things are fairly tight-lipped, right? But I think there's going to be some more openness about those things, you know, in the next coming months or so, as we share more and we feel the communities, you know, thoughts and ideas, you know, and try to build a more inclusive environment that allows our fans right to be able to have a voice.

Though this reveals really little about the new project, his words about "genre" and "style of play" allow us to assume he is talking about a new game, instead of some other form of media.

Yet when asked more or less the same question in an interview released in early November, Lorne Lanning replied the following:

> **[GoNintendo:](https://gonintendo.com/contents/11701-in-odd-we-trust-a-chat-with-oddworld-s-creator)** For fans of the Oddworld series, is Soulstorm considered canonical going forward?
>
> **Lorne Lanning:** Yes. The next game in the quintology will most likely pick-up where Soulstorm ends in some fashion, but we aren’t ready to even talk about the next Oddworld game yet. The five game storyline is already mapped out, but world conditions will shape that as times change in the meantime. So right now we are ideating on our next project, and we aren’t ready to talk about any new game just yet.

Though at first glimpse it might seem like these two quotes say similar things, there are some key differences in these two quotes. In the former excerpt we are given a cautious, yet far more optimistic view, along with a promise of more transparent development and an opportunity to "have a voice." Lanning, however, immediately closes the door on the idea that a) OWI is approaching a point where they are willing to discuss their next game, b) the process will be done in a more transparent way.

Perhaps the first quote was only referring to the recently launched _Poddcast,_ however, considering the fact that it largely deals with trivia and questions related to old games, it provides little in terms of "fans having a voice."

## Fanbase-rot

It doesn't take one to be a community manager to notice that fan activity has severely diminished over the months after the game's launch and — aside from small resurgences — never quite reached the same spot as it did during the early years and during the release period. In this post I'll largely focus on the Official Discord, though one quick glance at the Socialblade tracker of the series' Twitter and Facebook pictures paints a similarly bleak image.

As one can see above, activity steadily increased to about five thousand messages a day — which already isn't a massive number, but is at least a respectable amount of activity — before dropping to a fifth of previous engagement in the span of little more than two months.

The issue here isn't the drop itself, it'd be unrealistic to expect any community to keep so active as during the peak of hype, however, the fact that seemingly the Discord was unable to attract active new fans is definitely a reason for concern.

Sadly it's hard to empirically measure the aforementioned phenomenon, so I'm imploring the reader to trust my word as someone who's been around on the server since its inception.

Still, in an attempt to back my words up a little, here is a list of how many people who currently bear the "Regular" role on the server joined grouped by year:

| Year  |   # |
| :---- | --: |
| 2017  |  19 |
| 2018  |   4 |
| 2019  |   7 |
| 2020  |   4 |
| 2021  |   1 |
| 2022  |   3 |
| Total |  38 |

As one can see here, half of all regulars joined during 2017 and nearly 90% of them came before the game was released. Arguably before the bot was introduced, the process during which one became a regular was a bit messy, but still it shows how most were either old fans (my conversations with these people further backs this up) or brought in by the early marketing (i.e. the ARG or the earliest announcements.)

Spending some time on the server, it quickly becomes evident why there is so little activity and so few who bother to stick around. Simply put, there is nothing to talk about. Even people putting great faith into the series' future admit that there is such a content drought that the only topics that ever come up have already been talked to death.

The only thing that still consistently brings _some_ — though still not much — discussion is fanart and -fiction. Almost miraculously a few artists of different crafts stuck around and consistently churn out new pieces, keeping at least a bit of flame in the server. But even these, as impressive as they might be, only bring so much new content to talk about.

## Oddworld as a franchise is characterized by an identity-crisis

Forget the concerning numbers, forget developers talking over one another, the real issue with the series — namely the fact that both on an overarching and on a singular level it doesn't seem to be able to decide what it wishes to be. Let's start with Soulstorm:

### Soulstorm

Throughout Soulstorm's thinly-stretched and over half a decade long marketing cycle one notion was always consistent: "Soulstorm is what Abe's Exoddus was supposed to be." That is this game is meant to be its complete replacement, a version that fully supplants the supposedly-flawed original. But the thing is, Soulstorm _relies_ on Exoddus and other Old Oddworld media to deliver its impact. What do I mean by this? Think of the ending cutscene:

> **Alf:** So what else did you learn down there with that Keeper?
>
> **Abe:** So much but we’ve got… a mother.
>
> **Alf:** Du-duh all critters got mothers.
>
> **Abe:** No, I mean, we all have THE SAME mother. All of us… from RuptureFarms.
>
> **Alf:** Is that even possible?
>
> **Abe:** It has to be, because that’s what happened.
>
> **Alf:** But why would she…
>
> **Abe:** I don’t know why she left us. But I do know where she is.
>
> **Alf:** Alive? But we were all told our mothers… were dead.
>
> **Abe:** They lied to us about everything. And she’s not dead. But she’s… she’s just
>
> **Alf:** She’s what, Abe?
>
> **Abe:** She’s in… Nolybab!
>
> **Toby:** I don’t even know no one who’s ever even been to Nolybab.
>
> **Alf:** A city full of Gluks. It just ain’t right.
>
> **Abe:** We gotta find her… because we need to know… why she left us… in that horrible place.
>
> **Abe:** And why she gave me these.

Let's say a new fan reaches this point. They may or may not have played New 'n' Tasty, but in the grand scale of things it doesn't really matter, because the existence of Sam and the importance of Nolybab has only ever really been made clear in supplementary material related to Munch and Exoddus. Arguably the mystery of why she left the Mudokons at RuptureFarms does attempt to set up the same emotional impact as those past interviews did, but personally I feel it lacks the necessary hook for a fan, who lacks the additional context, to become invested in this.

They all have the same mother. So what? Fundamentally this fact alone doesn't really change anything since besides Alf and Toby, none of the Mudokons in the series ever had any deeper interaction with Abe than insults or blind praise. Whether they are blood related or not is frankly irrelevant.

They are afraid of Nolybab. So what? They were already afraid of Necrum and Abe went there no-problem.

Finally Abe talks about the stitches as if they suddenly have some massive in-universe significance, but previously this has never been the case and I don't really see any good way of resolving this. The generally accepted explanation was that Sam stitched his mouth shut to keep him from wailing and thus protect him from being beaten to death. Is it a touching backstory? Absolutely, but it's not really something to set up a sequel on. But fine, this is the New Quintology, let's assume they have some prophesied importance — in that case I'd argue that it further takes away from what made Abe so good in the first place: The fact that he was never a destined hero. He was a floor-waxer, who acted out of desperation and compassion and through impossible odds (see what I did there), saved his people multiple times. If he was always meant to be "The Guy Who Gets Stuff Done", then he is really just reduced to one of uncountable protagonists all walking the Hero's Journey. By trying to give Abe pathos and mystique his core character, a schmuck who's always the right mud in the wrong place, is slowly eroded away.

Simply put, for people already following the series, the ending is a tired retread of things we were already familiar with for close to two decades and for people newly arriving to the series, these revelations will simply mean nothing or very little. How are players meant to consider a "city full of Gluks" an intimidating experience, when the three buffoons in the game die bickering and ever acknowledging that Abe even exists, and Molluck, the only character who's really trying to do anything about the situation, is near-immediately reduced to a laughing stock who always just reacts to Abe's moves and never acts proactively? If anything the player in question should probably think "Phew, a city of idiots like that? It's gonna be a breeze!" and could you blame them for this? I certainly couldn't.

Ignoring the Old Quintology, Oddworld #3 simply has no proper hook, because as established before everything it builds up is inconsequential without supplementary context. But even if we do take it into consideration, the game completely failed to set up any short-term goals for the characters. As Lanning says in his 2018 Q&A, Nolybab will only appear in the fabled Oddworld #5 which is, just to reiterate, three games from now. Where will Abe and co. even go from here? Another bumbling adventure of Abe saving ten thousand Mudokons by himself while the others not very solemnly about how hard their life is? The formula worked for two games, sure, but because the story gave practically no character development to anyone, it sort of feels like we're simply running in circles.

However, the ending isn't the sole case of the game relying on old knowledge. There are two other plot points (one major, one arguably reduced to a more minor role) which lack the punch without the necessary context.

The first is the Brew's connection to the Mudokons. In Abe's Exoddus the Brew's origins were a pivotal plot-point. One could argue that the revelation about the bones was a bit unsurprising considering the imagery used by the game's promotional material, but what I think cannot be argued with is how well-integrated it was to the narrative — Abe was completely helpless upon encountering the sick Mudokons for the first time and finally getting the power to save them was an achievement, that took skill and effort from the player. I'm not sure if I'd call it cathartic, but it was certainly a memorable moment. Comparatively in Soulstorm after encountering Abe descends into a cave, collects some (partly literal) crap and makes an antidote. Gee, I sure am glad the main driving force of the plot (the Brew killing Mudokons after two days) was neutered so easily, we can't have tension in our plot! Not to mention the game doesn't even have the decency to let the player use the antidote ever again after the first time, which just further devalues it. Truth be told the Healing rings remained an underused feature in Exoddus as well, but the player was at least given a few opportunities to use it, so they'd still remember it by the end of the game.

Furthermore, the morbidity of Abe being forced to consume something made out of his people to proceed was put into front and centre in Exoddus. The Brew was something you were forced to get "intimate" with during the latter half of the game as it was a necessary solution to many of the game's action-puzzles. Soulstorm on the other hand takes a far more prudish approach:

For one, the Brew is no longer a consumable item. It is supposed to improve worker efficiency, so why not have a few sections where Abe is simply far too slow by himself or his followers a bit too weak, and then allow the player to make them drink Brew and temporarily get a bonus to their speed / reaction time? It'd allow for more strategical gameplay, tie into the new 'dark' atmosphere, and elevate the Brew from just another item into a game-changer.

For two, the fact that _"Brew is made from our bones!"_ is no longer a stinger. For the sake of fairness I have to highlight that Soulstorm does still feature this revelation as a narrative element, however, it's been reduced a literal background detail that you can maybe figure out, if you bother to loiter around long enough to read the LCD screens. I am a fan of Easter-eggs, but hiding one of the most gruesome details of the thing the very game is named after is puzzling. It also makes Necrum Mines stick out compared to the rest of the locations. Yes, Abe has to go there to meet the Keeper, but what of all the mining equipment? A slightly less attentive player will have zero idea what's going on.

The thing is, there is a really easy half-solution to this latter point, that doesn't sacrifice the "plot-twist" nature of bones: Have the Glukkons say things that slowly reveal what's going on. For instance, Morguer remarking that Mudokons are worth so much more dead than alive in a fit of rage or Aslik enjoying the fact that he can make twice the money by shipping the bones to the Brewery and then the Brew back into the hands of the Mudokons. Not only would these give them a bit more character, but would also plant the seed of realization in players. And then if someone's still too daft to figure it out, the Brewmaster could finally drop the hammer by exclaiming how the recent attacks on the other facilities will completely disrupt his perfect recipe or in an even more on the nose way cry out over how without bones the Brew will lose its deadly effect. Though this would still not have quite the same effect as Abe knowing the disgusting truth behind the drink and still being forced to drink it, but it would at least stop this plot-thread from feeling like an afterthought.
