---
title: "'Fixing' Soulstorm's story"
summary: "My take on Soulstorm's plot."
---

# 'Fixing' Soulstorm's story

The first rays of the sun reached down to near silence. Except for a quiet crackling and the distant impacts of debris, for the first time since ages nothing disturbed the desert's natural silence. As the sun chased away the darkness, slowly the scene of a wreckage revealed itself. Thick plumes of smoke climbed towards the sky as the corpse of a gigantic factory burned in the distance. In front of it, almost completely buried under rubble, lay a sign, with the word "RUPT" on it still visible, along with the hint of a grin on a grotesque face above. As dawn broke into morning fully, its neon lights flashed one final time, before blinking out once more.

Suddenly the relative peace was disturbed by the growing whine of police sirens. Dark blots appeared on the horizon---a handful of flying crafts, which approached the scene with tremendous speed. It only took them a minute to reach the edge of the ruined facility Their dirty, soot covered bodies shook as they landed, while the great exhaust pipes embedded into their backs sputtered and belched an impressive amount of smoke of their own.

As soon they touched down, doors on their sides sprang open, allowing dozens of Sligs to spew out of their insides, who quickly began to encircle the wreck. In less than an hour, the once-still wreck was swarming with grunts, who left no stone unturned.

A while later a final craft arrived. This one was far cleaner, and in far better shape. Its sides were decorated with grimacing, repulsed faces, whose lifeless eyes stared coldly at the past inferno in front of them, as the ship quietly landed a little behind the others.

A moment later the back of the craft opened, forming a ramp to the ground and revealing a Glukkon in a plain black suit. On it he wore a great sigil, forming a shield with two shotguns crossing each other, encircled in a piece of etched metal, which read "Detective-General Shank -- Bureau of Internal Investigations".

He took a quick hit of the half-burned cigarette in his mouth, his eyes scanning the scene with increasing disdain. He finally allowed the smoke to leave his diseased lungs, hardly even feeling the burn and began to descend the ramp.

The second he touched ground, he winced, disgusted by the dirt getting on his painstakingly-polished shoes. He couldn't stay annoyed for too long, however, as a Slig ran up to him and saluted.

"So?" Shank snapped at him, happy to pour his rage on someone.

The Slig froze for a moment under his glare. "It's all gone, sir."

"Witnesses?" the Glukkon continued with the same ire in his voice.

"Uhm, none. We found a couple of burnt corpses. Couple of us, some slaves, some animals, a few we, uh, couldn't figure out."

Shank snorted. "What about the executive board?"

"None, sir. It's like they disappeared."

The embers at the end of Shank's cigarette lit up as he took a hit so deep, it nearly burned the smoke to its tip. "And Molluck?"

"No clue, sir."

Before either of them could say another word, another Slig ran up to them, throwing a haphazard salute to his superior.

"Sir, we just found this, and it's huge!" he yelled, waving a remarkably-preserved tape in his hand. "The boys say it's who we're looking for."

Shank raised an intrigued eyebrow. "You two, follow me inside." He nodded towards the ship with his head.

The trio quickly entered the ship and came to a halt inside the main cockpit. Shank turned to a small embedded tape player on the wall. "Play it."

The Slig complied and a moment later the machine whirred to life. In the grainy footage a familiar face looked back at them, standing on a circular platform, with a Slig next to him.

"Molluck," Shank whispered under his breath. "Just what are you doing?"

The tape continued
