---
title: The Joy of Abe's Suffering
summary: A love-letter to Abe's Oddysee
---

# The Joy of Abe's Suffering
{:.no_toc}

I love Abe's Oddysee. Perhaps it's not exactly a unique sentiment, but nonetheless it's true. There
are very few if any games that come close to the joy Oddysee gives me. In this post I would like to
provide some introspection why this is and I hope that it might give a few of you a new angle of
appreciation for the game.

**Contents:**

* TOC
{:toc}

## Introduction

The year is 2006 or perhaps 2007... or maybe 2005, it's a blur really. I'm still in kindergarten and
my only experience with gaming is whatever my older cousins played on their PlayStation 1 and it
just so happens that Abe's Oddysee is one of these games. I was immediately captivated and also
creeped out by the dark atmosphere, "violent" deaths and menacing sounds of the game. To my 6-7
years old self Oddysee was horror, but not the kind of horror that makes you want to never look at
it again, rather the one that makes you wanna peek even though it scares you. Long story short, I
was in love with the game, despite the fact that until several years later I never even got farther
than the Monsaic Lines. It simply didn't matter, those three early areas cemented the game in my
mind.

Then came Exoddus and while I wouldn't say that my love for Oddysee was lost, I simply got way more
out of the former at the time because of things like QuikSave and since I played it on the PC, I
also had access to DDCheat and the level skip cheats. However, as the years passed and I rubbed
shoulders with more and more people from the fandom and also read far more about the circumstances
under which these games were made, I started to gain a newfound appreciation for Oddysee, that
finally made me reconsider about which game I consider my favorite.

## The First Impressions

> **Abe:** This... is RuptureFarms. They say it's the biggest meat-processing plant on Oddworld.

Even from the very first second you start the game, it is made clear to you, that Abe - and by
extension you, the player - are a speck in the machine, as the camera pans over the metal labyrinth
that is RuptureFarms. There is nothing welcoming about this place, everything is dilapidated, dirty
and oozes with a sense of uncaring coldness. No one would hear you scream if you died in this place,
nor would anyone care if they did. The feeling is reinforced by the ever-present Security Orbs which
survey both the outside of the facility and the workers inside, along with our first short sighting
of the Slig guards. Maybe your death means nothing, but it is obvious that your discontent would
swiftly be dealt with.
pla
Then we arrive at the only unintentionally humorous part of the cutscene, the part where Mudokons
are pulling levers for absolutely no obvious reason. Perhaps the original intention was to be more
or less a metaphor, showing how little their work is worth, but sadly whether this was the case or
not, it just looks silly in hindsight. Still, such a mistake is minuscule compared to how great of a
moodsetter this intro is, so lets leave it at that.

Even the products this plant makes look disgusting. From the endless lines of carcasses and huge
circular saws, to the dirty barrels and the chutes whose method of filling them reminds one of
vomiting -- or worse, defecation; the crapsack nature of this world starts forming in the players
mind as they realize someone probably eats this stuff.

Finally we are introduced to our main protagonist and main antagonist. The game makes sure we
understand just how different these characters are just from how they are showcased. Abe is shown
hung up in a cell, on him only a loincloth as he's awaiting his punishment in distress. Molluck
quickly shows up on the screen, appearing almost gigantic as he condescendingly looks us down. From
this moment you start rooting for Abe and hope that whatever situation he's in won't be his end.

The game then takes a step back and changes gears for a second, introducing us to Abe's recent past,
his role in RuptureFarms and how he became an enemy of the establishment. Unlike some kick-ass
heroes of the time, Abe's no fighter, he isn't even an important figure, he is a janitor. A janitor,
who's at the worst place at the worst place possible.

> **G-Man, Half Life 2:** The right man in the wrong place can make all the difference in the world.

After a quick reminiscing from Abe about the extinct Meeches and the other products RuptureFarms
still produces; we are shown a room full of creatures like Molluck and it is quickly obvious from
both Abe's narration and their grimaces that they are not happy. Indeed, they are rather scared as
the company is facing financial hardships. Every eye is on Molluck, who despite the tension, does
not buckle and quickly convinces the board that everything is going to be fine if they go through
with his plan. This plan being the systemic genocide of the factory's Mudokon workforce. Abe who
accidentally eavesdropped on the meeting decides to abandon his post and try to save his
life. Moments later a camera descends from the ceiling, documenting the event and unleashing the
numerous security forces of RuptureFarms on him.

I hate to mention this, but for correctness' sake I kind of have to: as Abe is running away, a Slig
quickly appears behind him presumably to neutralize him. Yet, he never even tries using his weapon
that he wags almost like a tail as he's chasing Abe. I understand that OWI was probably in a tight
spot when designing this scene as they both had to make it tense enough, while also figuring out how
to give Abe a logical reason for surviving his initial disobedience, but still, this scene could
have been handled better.

## A Short Narrated Walkthrough of Oddysee

In this section I'll go through the game quickly, naming some important things players can figure
out just by playing the game, before diving into some more in-depth topics.

### *"Welcome to the House of Fun"* / RuptureFarms

Putting the bombastic intro behind us, we are finally thrust into the game. There is no ceremony, no
tutorial ,aside from a few scrolling LCD screens, but let's not compare those to actual
tutorials. We are simply told that we should run as enemies are sure to arrive quickly. The game
employs here a bit of scripting as we are actually in complete safety until Abe grabs the first
ledge and hoists himself up and even then the Slig is unable to reach us, unless one is foolish
enough to go back. We are steadily introduced to some of the basic gameplay elements of Oddysee:
Sligs shoot you on sight, bombs are deadly, Abe's no fighter, and so on. All of this is done in an
organic fashion and experienced players aren't forced to play "by the rules;" if you already know
that Abe is capable of possessing enemies, you can simply possess the Slig on the screen which is
supposed to teach you sneaking and then shoot the one sleeping next to the elevator.

Speaking of possession, it is an exemption of the organic tutorial described above. The game never
directly tells you about it until you reach the Monsaic Lines. Even the manual keeps a tight lip
about this. This is in fact a lucky byproduct of the game's original plot-progression that
ultimately didn't make the cut. Basically the idea was that since Abe's mouth is stitched shut, he's
not capable of either talking or chanting and thus only when he reached the native areas - and lost
his stitches - could he start retaliating, peacefully and otherwise.

Moving on, even if these areas are only here to teach you, the art does not take a backseat. We are
shown parts of the production line and just how wasteful RuptureFarms really is. There are tons upon
tons of barrels and yet they are supposedly losing profits? Nothing points these things out, the
player is expected to draw conclusions themselves, which I consider a strong side of this
game. There is a certain wonder to realizing things, that simply isn't there if you're told.

One way or another the player will reach the end of the line, however, their triumph is short lived
as you're unexpectedly slapped with one of the biggest sucker punches of the game

> You escape and all 28 workers on this level die!

I imagine most people are shocked upon reading this sign, albeit for very different reasons: some
because they didn't even bother to save Mudokons until now and the consequences of their lack of
actions suddenly manifested. Others might be shocked about the number, they tried to save everyone,
yet the numbers don't add up. This is of course due to secret areas, which are admittedly not easy
to spot unless you really pay attention. Though I suppose there will be those who simply won't care
despite the fact that the game isn't warning you as a joke.

### The Escape / Stockyards

So, you finally left that hellhole behind. Or so you thought, as it isn't Mother Nature who greets
you at the other end of Abe's comical escape. Before you can escape, you still have to dare the
outskirts of RuptureFarms, the Stockyards. This area uses the game's screen-based layout greatly. As
you move further and further away from the factory which is perpetually illuminated by sickly
lamp-light so does it dawn on you that it is in fact the middle of the night. This is a nice example
of subtle continuity, as in the intro Abe said that he "was working **one night** at RuptureFarms."

The level can be divided into two sections, one of which is where the influence of the factory is
still very strong. This is signaled by the presence of bright lights, floating mines, guard towers
captive animals, and the general appearance of the platforms Abe is walking on. The other, far
longer section is where Abe moves in almost complete darkness and the only Industrialist influence
he encounters are Slig and Slog patrols and some mines.

It easy to zone out and get lost in the beautifully painted night skies or lose focus due to being
chased around by enemies, however, the real elephant in the room shows itself once one pays more
attention to the environment. The silhouettes of lynched Mudokons are almost everywhere, underlining
the feeling of overwhelming odds and hopelessness Abe is facing against.

Still, he perseveres and finally encounters one of the most uplifting moments of the game, the
Mudokon Moon. As revealed later by Lanning, this holy celestial body caused the disagreement the at
the time allied Mudokons and Glukkons, leading to the former's eventual enslavement. However, Abe
knows nothing of this, he just stands there, fascinated. That is until the ground under him gives
way and he falls...and dies. Yeah, in about one hour of gameplay we were bombarded with experiences
such as an oppressive and dangerous factory, trigger happy guards, the moral weight of not saving
your kin, seeing the lynched remains of said kin and now the main character's death.

However, this isn't the time and place for Abe to die, so a new character enters to save the day,
BigFace. He is a mysterious shaman, who resurrects Abe and tasks him with completing two sacred
trials to receive a power strong enough to bring down RuptureFarms. I really like this. It presents
a pretty clear route Abe has to take, while leaving enough wiggle room to use this otherwise
simple plot to show us different areas of the world. I mean, both trials could have happened in one
of the areas easily, but that'd only be half the fun.

### Respite with Extras / The Monsaic Line

And so Abe given life again continues his journey into the heart of a remaining, albeit greatly
diminished, free Mudokon civilization. While I love the looks of this place, I have to admit, I
don't really understand how a place like this could exist. Mudokons reproduce similarly to bees,
meaning they are dependent on a queen to produce new offspring. Now from what we know, Mudokons have
long been in the servitude of the Glukkons and the only queen we know of is in captivity at an
unspecified Industrialist location. One has to wonder how did they even survive until now without
getting overrun by the Sligs and taken into the workforce. Sadly the game otherwise establishes
things very well, so it's impossible to not consider this a plot-hole. For instance, one could
stipulate that these are Mudokons who similarly to Abe also escaped RuptureFarms and returned to
nature. But this surely isn't the case as they are very aggressive against him and as the manual
says "they don't take kindly to city-folk." Similarly one could say that they simply survived as
long, but this is extremely unlikely as the average Mudokon lifespan is 45 years, much less than the
"eons" that the story about the Schism is talking about.

Grumbling aside, the Monsaic Lines is a gorgeous area and a great momentary stop for a breath. This
area provides relatively few challenges aside from the initial "mini-trial" Abe has to complete to
be let into the more inner areas of the place. This is mostly in the form of slingshot-wielding
guardians, whose somewhat questionable way of authenticating others is to whistle a tune which the
other party has to mimic perfectly. Step too close and you'll soon find yourself with a pebble
between your eyes. Other obstacles include falling rocks, swarms of angry bees and the
oh-so-familiar bottomless pits.

Also, this is where Abe/player is first taught to use possession against enemies. This is a huge
moment of empowerment as the Sligs who you could only outwit or perhaps sneakily take down using a
grenade suddenly become tools too that you can use and abuse for your own purposes.

Another thing you're introduced to are the Flintlocks which serve as sort of special "switches" that
you have to activate in later areas to proceed.

Once the player is equipped to face the dangers ahead, they are given a choice of how to
proceed. They're free to dare either Paramonia or Scrabania first, though once they made their
choice, there are no backsies. There is also a third "choice" albeit that one is basically just
going one screen further to see an envoy of Sligs patrolling the road back to RuptureFarms. This is
also a bit of environmental storytelling as it becomes obvious that even with your magical powers,
Abe alone isn't enough to surmount this blockade.

I'll first discuss Paramonia and then Scrabania as the wells leading to them come in that order.

### Rumble in the Jungle / Paramonia

And so we arrive to one of my favorite locations of the game; the lush, green forests of
Paramonia. It is just such joy to experience this place, it's beautiful, full of great setpieces and
the framing of the Temple always looming in the background is simply superb. We are also almost
immediately treated to Elum, our trusty traveling companion.

Paramonia is really about spectacle as the area doesn't really provide any new gameplay features
(other than Elum of course), rather focuses on providing memorable moments. It also provides a
nice bit of foreshadowing as in one of the screens the player is treated to a several screens long
spiderweb, that implies what sort of enemies he's going to be facing against in the temple.

The whole area reaches its peak on its last screen, where we see Abe being nothing more than a tiny
ant in front of the door of the gigantic temple.

#### The Paramonian Temple

In stark contrast to the welcoming, bright forest, the temple is a cold, ancient structure which
immediately forebodes a change. The huge suspended stone tablet bearing the mark of the Paramite
further punctuates the feel that you're on someone's else's home court. And indeed, after you evaded
the Slig patrol that guards the entrances, you are introduced to a wholly new enemy that hasn't
appeared before, the Paramite. They are spider-like beings, whose face looks similar to hands. Their
gimmick is that alone they won't bother you until cornered, however, the moment two are on the same
platform, their anxiety evaporates and they immediately attempt to turn you into a snack.

This is where the Flintlocks come up again as you have to complete several smaller puzzles to
proceed to a final trial. This sort of layout is called a "Hub" in the community and there are
several of these in the game. I'll talk about them in more detail later, for now just keep them in mind.

### Free-Fire Zone

So, you just completed two huge treks and received the magical tattoos. It's time to put the power
you got to use...on that unfortunate Slig patrol that doesn't even suspect what's going to hit
them. The Shrykull is a brilliant moment of empowerment for the player, as you're both invulnerable
and all-destructing at the same time. The fact that you only receive this power extremely rarely
further helps make these moments memorable.

Things have changed since you left in the Stockyards and the area surrounding it. The place is
filled with landmines and bloodthirsty Slogs. This doesn't only serve as a natural way of increasing
the difficulty as the game progresses, but also as a piece of environmental storytelling, showing
how Molluck really can't afford to have a rogue agent like Abe on the loose.

You of course can't return to RuptureFarms on the way you left, but luckily someone just so happened
to leave a bird portal in the right place...

### RuptureFarms - Zulag 1

We're back in the factory at last! Things are quite similar, however, there are more Sligs around
this time and also there is a wholly new batch of Mudokons to save. I didn't realize this when I
first finished the game, so I completely missed them, even though you can save quite many of your
peers by being a bit perceptive.

Once you feel like you're done, you can take the ballcar and leave for Zulag 2.

### The Boardroom

Molluck's not happy about Abe's progress as he's practically breathing down his and his board's
necks. Figuring RuptureFarms is a lost ship, he orders the complete gassing of the entire area,
killing off every Mudokon left in the facility, including Abe. The Boardroom is a short and sweet
gauntlet of rescuing a single Mudokon to in turn receive the power of the Shrykull one last
time. Despite the fact that there is a time limit, it's not really there to really screw you over,
it's more or less just a ploy along with the blaring sirens and flashing lights to try to get the
player riled up and cause them to make mistakes.

But once you successfully faced the challenge, you are presented with an extremely satisfying ending
as you fry the Glukkon directors and shut down the gas...only to be promptly knocked out.

The story loops back into itself and Abe is right back in his cell, having finished his tale. Now it
falls on the player whether Abe is rescued by the BigFace or is left to die in the hands of one very
angry Glukkon.

## Gameplay mechanics

Now that we are up to speed, we can finally focus on the most obvious part of the game, the
gameplay. It serves as one of the three columns that makes Abe's Oddysee great.

### Movement

### Possession

### GameSpeak

### Throwables

### The Shrykull

## The Sound Design

The sound design serves as the second column of the three columns that creates the uniqueness of
this game. From the atmospheric musics of each area, to the noises the characters make everything
feels unique and crisp and powerful.

An example I simply can't leave without mention is the possession sound. It is hands down the single
best video game sound effect that I know of. It is a perfect little story in itself: it starts out
modestly as Abe starts chanting, then the sounds starts swelling as the music cooperates with the
graphics until finally the crescendo peaks and the whole thing is punctuated further with a moment
of silence. It is almost like an exclamation mark at the end of a sentence and it practically
screams: the gameplay has changed, Abe is now in control.

## The Art

## The Story

As you might have noticed I didn't include the story into the three pillars that make AO
great. Before you close the page in anger, please let me explain myself. I like AO's story a lot, I
just don't find it part of its strongest suits. It is a simple but sweet story, easy trumped by
plenty of moderately famous books and even other videogames. The characters too aren't particularly
deep; they're basically the equivalents of folk tale characters. Abe goes through the Hero's
Journey, more or less point-by-point. Molluck too is almost satirically evil.

However, here comes the major "but" of this section. Perhaps the story and characters aren't the
best of the best, but the implied world is one of the best I've experienced in gaming. What I mean
by "implied world" is things that aren't mentioned in-game, but rather left open as things that the
player can ponder about. For instance, how did the Mudokons fall from a species that can build
megastructures like the Paramonian and Scrabanian temples to a dumb cattle-race of slaves. Or how
the societies work? Or if RuptureFarms is only a factory, how does the rest of the "civilized" world
look like?

<!--  LocalWords: RuptureFarms Mudokon Molluck Mudokons Slig Oddysee Exoddus Paramonia Paramonian
 gameplay Glukkon
 -->
