---
title: "Cleanup Crew"
---

# Cleanup Crew

It was a gloomy morning in the forest, which in itself wasn't unusual for this region. Even though
the Moon has already descended the sun wasn't able to properly shine through the thick clouds
surrounding the area, painting the world in a sickly greenish-brown hue. The silence was only broken
by sporadic calls of unseen creatures between the trees, whom understood that something major
happened here just a few days ago, yet couldn't comprehend the true scale of what just unfolded.
Soon another sound joined the calls, almost too soft to hear at first, but steadily increasing in
volume. It was an unnatural whirring and thumping sound. The animals didn't need to ponder for long
about what could make these curious noises as suddenly nearby trees began to fall as the leader of a
long convoy of unwieldy machinery started cutting a path towards the middle of the forest using
huge, front-mounted saws. Some of these vehicles had various building equipment mounted on them,
others had thin slits on their chassis, allowing the passengers to observe the outside world, yet
remain protected. The people inside shuffled uncomfortably, their pale green tentacles twitching
anxiously from what's to come.

- "Cleanup duty" - Muttered Zeg to himself. He was one of the many Sligs ordered to go to locations
  of interest and deal with certain problems that could arise. - "I wish I was back on my usual
  post..."

His train of thought was cut short, however, as the APC carrying them suddenly came to a halt and
the backside opened up. Soon another Slig leaned in from outside, wearing sleek, expertly painted
and manufactured pants.

- "Alright, rustpants, it's time to go. Grab your shovels and filters and get a move on!"

Behind his mask, Zeg stared at his higher-up sourly. People like him had it so easy, smoking
cigarettes and hanging back while the rest do their job. Zeg himself has never done cleaning duty
before, but he heard the anecdotes from those who have, and from what he could gather it's pretty
much the worst thing one can be assigned to, aside from perhaps being sent back to Mother.

Still, it wasn't the time to think, so he reached forward, took out his shovel and a filter and
stepped outside the vehicle. The shovel's handle was chipped in several places and the head was
caked in dirt and rust. The filter itself didn't fare much better as much of it was covered by an
off-putting yellowish discoloration. Zeg experimentally attached the filter to his mask, but then
immediately yanked it out as well as his mask quickly filled with the thick smell of mold from the
unkempt device. Meanwhile the rest of the team has also left their transports and everyone grouped
together as a bunch in front of their leader.

- "So, here's the deal. There is a village right in front of us, you go in, kill everything that
  might still move, then you drag out the corpses into the center of the place. You," - he pointed
  at a part of the group, - "will start digging a hole. Don't stop until it's deep enough to bury
  about sixty bodies. Once the hole is dug, you'll start the burial, then report back to me. Got
  it?"

- "Yes... sir."  - The group replied without much eagerness. 

As they moved through the trees Zeg wondered what's the point in this operation. Their employers had
machines that could eat up whole cities worth of land at a time. Why order a bunch of guys with
shovels to do their dirty work? But he couldn't come up with a good answer. Suddenly a stench
permeated through his mask. It was a sickly sweet smell, that immediately made him nauseous. Yet
after taking another look at the filter he was given, it still seemed like the lesser evil, so he
pressed on.

Soon the trees became sparser and sparser and several wooden structures appeared before the team.
Most of them were blackened by the flames of the fight that took place here not too long ago and yet
it was easy to tell that they were masterfully crafted buildings, not a single screw or nail in
sight, yet they stood high above the Sligs, whom looked around warily. As they slowly pushed forward
the stench became even worse and Zeg, among many others, finally caved and put the filter on. Its
moldy odor felt almost refreshing after the horrible smell of decay.

The team dispersed, the hole digging team started their job, while the rest each went to a building
in groups of three. One of them carried a simple pistol in case there was anyone who could still put
up a fight or needed to be put out of their misery. Not that they cared much for mercy, but leaving
anyone unaccounted for was a liability and they weren't here to take slaves. The other two carried
shovels to dig the bodies out of rubble if necessary and of course to carry them after the building
is secured.

Zeg's team consisted of a fairly unremarkable pistol-carrier, Zeg himself as one of the
shovel-Sligs and finally a Slig, whose pants were seemed to be a generation older than what the rest
wore and his skin tone was even paler than usual. Though no one paid much attention to this as they
had a far more important task at hand and they didn't want to stick around any longer than necessary.

- slig cleanup crew
- cement bodies -> can't turn into birds
- need character name