---
layout: none
---

<head>
<link rel='stylesheet' href='/css/variables.css'>
<link rel='stylesheet' href='/css/fonts.css'>
<link rel='stylesheet' href='/css/dok.css'>
</head>

<header markdown=1>

# ODDWORDS

# The Death of Knowledge

## A Farewell Letter

---

</header>

<main markdown=1>

<p id='intro'>Dear Friends,</p>

And enemies I suppose, - though I hope any and all misunderstandings and clashes I've had with
people over the years did not cause the parties affected to consider me as such, as I also do not
wish to consider them more than people I simply have disagreed with, - I am writing this post to
explain the lack of updates on the site since the release of Soulstorm. The points I'm going to make
here might not turn out to be too surprising to some of you, but I consider it my responsibility to
inform the people who, through thick and thin, have read my site over the years.

## The Future of Oddwords

I will cut to the chase: **Oddwords from now on will likely not receive any further updates.**
Before I delve into my reasons, I'd like clarify what I mean by "likely not." This does not mean
that I shall never ever touch the site again in any shape or form. Who knows, maybe a few months
from now I'll get super inspired and write something new. Or fix something stupid in an old article.
Or reorganize things in a smarter way. All of these are entirely possible, what my proclamation
rather means is that I won't invest in nearly as much energy or time into the site as I have
previously. It also doesn't mean that the site will suddenly be taken offline. Due to how Github
Pages operates, I thankfully don't pay for hosting, only for my URL whose costs are negligible. I
don't have any current plans to remove or block content or otherwise make anything I have published
inaccessible.

I have two main reasons why I'm sunsetting the site. Firstly, I've largely ran out of content I can
and am willing to publish. When I started Oddwords nearly three years ago I did so with the
impression that Oddworld has tons of untapped lore that only waits for someone like me to uncover.
Looking back I realize I was foolish... Of course if this really was the case, then surely over the
nearly twenty five years the series has existed someone would have bothered to collect and catalogue
everything before an absolute newcomer like me could. If you were to scroll to the very bottom of
the site's frontpage, you'll see five posts in the "Essays" category. These were my very first posts
and back then I thought my site will be full of writings like this. It didn't take too long,
however, for me to realize that this will not be possible. The sad truth was that there is simply
not that much content that you can reasonably discuss without engaging in wild speculation.

For instance, I am not interested in creating the sort of content that the Spirit of 1029, Pupbenny
or any similar creators publish. This is not a dig against them, simply a difference in "ideology."
I like dealing in facts when it comes to information about the series and strictly separate whatever
speculation I have using separate posts or disclaimers. What's more, one of the very reasons I
started Oddwords (aside from exploring the lore) was due to the fact that unbridled speculation has
deeply muddied the waters of what's canon and what's fanon. I believe the breaking point was when I
read about Squeek's "brainslurgs" (more on them [here](/squeek)) and then being told that everything
I've just read was simply false and made up from half-understood Alf quotes and speculation. Fuelled
by disappointment I chose it as a goal to clear up things like these, hopefully in a way that would
also entertain my audience. And true enough I was able to reach more people than I thought I would
and for that I will always be grateful. Long story short, while I could certainly ramble on for a
few thousand words about speculative plot points or my own head-canon, I really don't want to.

Regardless, I'm not regretful for my site, it taught me much about writing both prose and code. One
only has to look back at where [it all started](/oddwords_history) to see how far we came. I had the
privilege of interviewing people I never would have thought I could talk to. Some even used my site
as an authoritative source or to argue their own points, all things that make me genuinely happy.

<!--
 Tangents
aside, what the lack fo content meant is that I quickly had to reinvent what my site was about and I
slowly drifted towards more "meta" topics, like reviewing trailers, making comparisons between the
games and interviews with ex-developers. The thing that connects most of these is that they are all
"non-renewable resources" so to speak. You can only speak so much about a trailer and so much with a
person about their work relevant to the series.-->


## My Involvement

As you might have already noticed, I'm careful with my phrasings. It'd be hubris to claim that I did
absolutely everything possible on my site, because this is obviously not true. I've only made two
reviews about the games, providing an opportunity for at least four additional posts on the site.
However, this is where my second reason for stopping comes into play: I have lost interest in
Oddworld.

Now, I don't want to type out an autobiography here, so I'll try to keep it succinct, but I want to
put things into context. I've known Oddworld for about as long as I can remember, I've
pretend-played it in kindergarten and afterwards too it remained a fond memory, but I haven't paid
it much heed until the first ARG puzzles for Soulstorm started coming out circa 2017. I was
intrigued enough to go on OWF and with some fortunate digging I was able to find the site's
community Discord, where I've spent about three and a half years now. As some know I'm also the
poster of the very first message on OWI's own official Discord. Point is, while I'm not part of the
venerable old guard, who have been around since 1997, I've still had plenty of time to hang around,
get to know people and make connections.

The wait for Soulstorm at first was not an issue. We got an ARG clue every few days, morale was high
and I've learned something new every day. I also received the honor of being tutored on Oddworld
history by the creators of Magog on the March, whom I can thank most of my knowledge related to the
series for. Everything seemed well. But as the passing of time would soon prove, this was not to
last and cracks slowly started to show themselves at the edges. The ARG slowed down. The puzzles
became somehow both more and more convoluted and yet less interesting at the same time. I remember
transcribing and translating at least ten if not fifteen Morse-codes myself. Who could forget about
*"We will rise?"* and how absolutely overused it was in the ARG. And what's even worse, if someone
wasn't interested in the ARG, or it was taking a break there was nothing else to do in the meantime.
This had catastrophic results. 

The third-party ARG-solving team - GameDetectives - who joined the hunt bailed upon seeing how the
ARG seemingly dropped dead. Activity plummeted, tensions increased. What also certainly didn't help
was the fact that Soulstorm kept being delayed again and again, OWI never giving us a proper reason
why. Around this time the server sometimes spent weeks with hardly a dozen messages being posted
every day and many were worried that it'd just outright die.

I have to admit that my behavior at the time due to my frustration was shameful and in retrospect I
regret acting the way I did. While I still consider what I've said back then largely correct, the
way I said them was unkind and downright provocative at times. If you're reading this post and are
part of those I've slighted, I'm genuinely sorry.

Despite all of this, we've endured somehow and around 2019 more and more short trailers started
dropping about the game. At this point some of us started to worry, though I would be lying if I
said that I wasn't trying to be as optimistic as I could back then. After all, it was the first and
perhaps only Oddworld game I would witness being made and released. I could dwell further on
happened during these five years, but it really doesn't matter all that much and if something is
exceptionally important it will be mentioned anyway.

So the wheel of time continued to turn until that faithful day arrived and Soulstorm was finally
released. By the time I could finally get it to work and streamed the first few levels to OWF, it
was all over. I have to admit, I have tried reviewing Soulstorm. Three times to be exact, each time
reaching about three thousand words (that's roughly the double of what you've read in this post,
times three!) I could never complete any of them. There is simply so much wrong with this game. The
bugs made some levels nearly impossible to complete, I fell out of the world so many times and
finally to rub salt into my wounds, the game deleted my save file. I admit, I haven't felt the urge
to try again since. Not to mention the story, which deserves its own paragraph later.


My heart - at least when it comes to the series - is broken beyond repair.

## My thoughts about Oddworld's Future



</main>