# The Death of Knowledge

The worst thing about losing interest about something you cared about so much that you somewhat even
based your identity around is the fact that both staying and leaving feels like massive hurdles.
Allow me to be frank in this post, I have always strived to write Oddwords in mostly positive tone,
focusing on things I liked and only constructively raise the things I didn't, but with recent
developments, I have simply became tired.

Soulstorm came and passed without as much as an eye-bat from the gaming community and the only thing
that remains is the very reactionary responses to this from the two ends of the fandom. Some cope by
stressing how this is just the setup of a much bigger thing coming, while others - and I admit I
partook in this group quite a few times - chose to turn their sadness into poison and mock the
series for its failures. What no one really seems to do is talk about Soulstorm itself... I mean,
don't get me wrong there are inane conversations about what gameplay works, what doesn't, etcetera,
but the point is, due to the shallowness of the story and the fact that the series seems to be
rapidly circling down the proverbial drain it seems like even the fans are hard-pressed to find
things to talk about.

I'd like to take the opportunity in this post to talk about a few things that I usually left to
Discord-conversations. Something like this has been on my mind since late-2019, but I never actually
got around to finishing it, somewhat due to a very stubborn smidgen of hope that still clung to me,
which insisted that Soulstorm will redeem things, it will reignite the fandom and _everything will
be fine._ But everything isn't fine, so I here I am.

## A Summon to the Corpse

There exists an archaic term in my language, coined by a locally famous poet called
_"tetemrehívás,"_ which as it can be read right above translates roughly to a "summon to the corpse
/the deceased" and it refers to the superstitious practice of trying to determine a murderer by
making all suspects visit the deceased, which upon the closeness of the real culprit would
miraculously start bleeding fresh blood.

So why am I going into this? Well, one reason is because it's a pretty cool legend, but to be more
topical I wish to examine the "corpse" of the Oddworld fandom and name whom I consider the biggest
culprits in its death.

### OWI

It might not come as a surprise, but I name OWI as the primary suspect. I have tried for years and
years to get them to care a bit more about us. Pleaded to do something, anything for the community.
Lore, competitions, just talking to us in general and while I got a few promises over the years,
mostly vague ones, hardly any was ever met.

With this fact in mind, it's very obvious why the fandom isn't blooming: What the hell would they
even talk about? OWF has picked the meat off every single bone in every single game twenty times
already during its nearly twenty years of existence. Are old fans supposed to just chew and
regurgitate the same old and talked to death topics forever? You can't keep a community like this
and as it can be seen, they didn't.

### Overzealous fans

Of course the lack of content lead to another common, but very unfortunate phenomenon: That being
fans who aren't willing to compromise. It doesn't really matter which side this person is on,
whether it's a puritan who only considers AO canon and the rest of the series can go to hell or a
consoomer, who literally owns every game seventy times, the fact is you can't have a meaningful
conversation with them.

Over my slowly six years in this fandom (I feel weary just writing this down), I have experienced
many people who literally deify OWI and especially Lorne Lanning, like they were infallible gods.
Firstly, it's an objective fact that they aren't. If they were, we and them wouldn't be so deep in
shit, but regardless, it is also a very unproductive viewpoint to have. Any conversation I've tried
to have with these people were quickly warped into them trying to justify that all misfortune was in
fact caused by big corporations (not true if one puts in the time to research what really happened)
or are really just minor setbacks before OWI really takes off. Anyone who has perhaps less patience
or simply cares less than the pathological amount of attention I have paid this series would simply
just leave to do something more interesting or worthwhile. And could you blame them for that? Of
course not! It's like arguing about religion but in an alarmingly literal way.

And I know, people who have talked to me over the years might already roll their eyes heavily, I'm
not above this. Especially in previous years I was a real little shit. I hold that I've had very
good intentions at hart from the get go and ultimately just wanted to help, but my methods were
unrefined to say the least. Still, I believe I have mellowed out enough during the recent periods
and my past experiences only help to strengthen my point.

### Recently, moderators

## The cult of "Next time for sure"

There is a surprisingly common notion in the fanbase that can be summarized with the titular "next
time for sure." You constantly hear things like "next time for sure the game will be better" or
"next time for sure the story will reveal more things" or "next time for sure the series will enter
the mainstream once again." Perhaps the phrasing differs, but the underlying point is the same:
People either out of ignorance or straight up denial simply forget that OWI had six chances at
accomplishing "next time for sure," and out of those six only the first two can be called clear
successes.

It's like one is listening to a bunch of grief-stricken people who try to delude themselves that
things will magically get better from themselves. Hell, I've even seen some who buy into the
absolutely abhorrent logic that "while this game sucks, you should definitely buy it, because the
next one might be better." Friends, do you not realise that if you fund mediocrity, you'll only get
mediocrity? While at the end of the day we are only talking about like $50, but the mindset itself
is absolutely destructive towards both the consumer and ultimately the company too, because the
message it conveys is that "we're happy with this level of quality, you don't have to try harder,
we'll shower you in cash anyway!"

The same thing more or less happened with New 'n' Tasty and with Soulstorm out, put your hand on
your heart and honestly say, was it worth it for what it is or do you already consider that "the
next game will fix things for sure"? If it is the former, I'm happy you got your money's value. If
it is the latter, I implore you to take a step back and appreciate the valuable lesson life is
trying to teach you. Don't be a schmuck.

## "It was all the publishers"

Another extremely common defence one can hear from fans is the notion that every single failing of
OWI can be attributed to corporate meddling. People never fail to point out Microsoft's weak
recommendation of "Abe & Munch's Fun Adventures" as proof that MO was ruined by them, but this is
all wrong. If one really puts their time in and reads a few sources, not even necessarily just the
contemporary ones, but from back then, we're painted a different picture:

### GT Interactive

GT was on one hand a somewhat strict publisher, they ultimately controlled whether OWI lived or
died, but when it comes to Oddworld, they had exactly no influence over the game as can be heard in
the video below:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/PqqguSp29T8" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

As can be heard here, GT wasn't even allowed inside the building unless OWI allowed them to. The
only major thing they ever did was the 9-month timeframe for AE and even there OWI was more asked
than demanded to make a new game:

## The issue with content creators

Now, before we get into the meat of this, I assume I have to set the record straight before some
people might think I'm doing this out of jealousy or something among those lines. Let me assure you,
that I am not. I am fully aware that numbers-wise I am at the bottom of the barrel. I believe it's
fair to say that my consistent reader base is around a hundred people. Which is actually a lot to be
honest. I'm really happy to have been worth this many people's while.

But it is also true that compared to me literally all other major Oddworld content creators are
orders of magnitudes larger. And this is a problem. Now again, don't get me wrong, it's not that I'd
take away the numbers from any of these people, but it is safe to say some of the most prominent
content creators actively hurt the series' coherence and the fandom's collective consciousness.

I'm not going to name names, nor am I going to raise overly specific examples, because at the end of
the day I am not angry at the person, I am rather saddened by their behaviour. What I mean by this
is the misrepresentation of facts and the endless unmarked headcanoning that appears in these
videos. Oddworld's world is already extremely fickle, we only have a few _paragraphs_ worth of
content that describes just what sort of place it is and these creators just drive more and
more wedges into it by making up plausibly sounding, but completely fabricated pieces of trivia and
then inserting them into their content like it was canon.
