---
title: "Folk-Lore: The Averse Effects of Fan Memory"
summary: OWI drops molehills, the community picks them up and turns them into mountains.
---

# Folk-Lore

In the Oddworld community, there are a few fabled words, that make a lot of
people's eyes flame up, along with words like "Oh man, it would've been GREAT!",
even though a lot of these people probably have no idea what it exactly is they
are asking for.

I mean... What *are* these projects? And I don't mean their sales pitches, do we
have any actual confirmation that these projects had any chance of really
happening?

Take the example of SligStorm, as it's one of the best examples of this
phenomenon. SligStorm was confirmedly just an idea, something fun OWI thought
up, but because of unfortunate communication, it slowly became part of the
"Oddworld Pantheon", a legend that turned the simple idea of a game about some
white Slig, who escapes a facility into this heavily mystified project, much
greater in scope than it was ever intended to be.

> **Alf [Dear alf; August 2011, Volume 1]:** SligStorm is one of those ideas we
> had that didn’t get far, but it’s still in our “One Day” drawer.

> **Alf [Dear Alf; August 2011, Volume 2]:** SligStorm wasn’t so much cancelled
> as never started or announced.

But it isn't a singular example. Maybe the most sought after game is "The Brutal
Ballad of Fangus Klot", which was a game supposed to run on Stranger's Wrath's
engine. Not only is the information behind it extremely vague — Is it part of
Oddworld? Or not? Both were said before. —, it also turns out that development
ended after just one month of pre-production and everyone who was at the time
capable of turning the project into reality was let go.

> **[David Fried](/swinterview):**
>I've heard nothing... I did hear about Fangus when I was leaving. That was
>supposed to be the next project that everyone would work on. Had some
>interesting concepts in it, like battle armor that could be blown off the
>character.
>
>Thing is, they had already terminated the people who would be able to make that
>a reality (in my opinion). So it was kind of doomed from the start.

> **David Fried:**
>As far as Fangus, I don't... remember much.  I didn't see anything that they were doing.  And literally 1 month into pre-planning for pre-production, everyone was let go.

And despite these more or less concrete signs that the project is long dead,
people still vehemently ask for it.

Similarly another project still going rounds is Hand of Odd, a planned
free-to-play Real Time Strategy game, where you could either play as the
Industrialists or the Natives, on large scale battlefields, with each battle
affecting the world somewhat. While it might sound cynical, when one takes off
their rose-tinted glasses, it becomes apparent, that these are buzzwords. The
fact that Lorne Laninng was so eager to drop the project after his quick chat in
the loo with Robert Kotick, seems to imply that HoO was in fact not ready to be
"delivered next year."

> **Alf [Dear alf; August 2011, Volume 1]:** Oddworld: The Hand of Odd will be
> delivering next year. 
