---
title: Slig Noir
summary: Who shot the higher up?
---

<style>
main h1, main h2 {
    width: 100%;
    text-align: center;
}

main h1 + h2 {margin-top: 1em; padding-bottom: 0;}
</style>

# Slig Noir

## Chapter 1

The pub buzzed gently as the patrons discussed their daily hardships and problems. Most of them
looked quite downtrodden as they lowered their head again and again to drink whatever questionable
fluids they could afford. I was never a fan of mingling with folks like these, so I instead opted to
sit at one of the many barstools away from the crowd. As I was sipping my cheap, but nonetheless
still leagues better beer, my mechanical legs whirred softly.

"Blasted things" - I thought, - "but then it's not easy to find a repair shop that's willing to take
someone like me. They say money is the only lord in Modos, but I can't help but wonder how these
idealists deal with the fact that most of the city isn't even willing to consider our folk people."

My inner grumbling was cut short, however, as I suddenly heard my arm-mounted communicator ring. I
threw down a few bucks for the drink and hurried outside the building. Not that it was quieter
outside, it was simply trading up the noise of people for the noise of machines. But machines at
least don't have ears, or I suppose, they simply don't have as many and whenever I'm called on this
line it means business. The call itself was quite short, not that I really anticipated anything
else, Modos' people are paranoid and with good reason. My contact gave me an address and a time,
that's all I really need. I waved off a cab and got in, giving the driver an address close, but not
too close to our rendezvous point.

The name is Ned, by the way, the closest I could be called is a private investigator, but I feel
like that provides a false impression about my methods and motives. In my youth I believed that
joining the department would help make the city a safer place, but it quickly dawns on one that
you're simply helping richer bad people deal with the less rich ones. Why did I stay, you ask? Well,
what are my options really? Go to a factory and patrol 24/7? Or perhaps spend the rest of my days as
a slob like so many others uncaring of the world? No, people like me want something more, even if
might not be as glamorous as we thought.

I got off the cab and continued my journey on foot. I was on the second level of the city. The higher
ups lived below us on the fourth level, where the smog that continues to billow above us doesn't
reach. Some unfortunates can only afford to live on the topmost level that's eternally covered by
the poisonous gases and exhaust from the factories that intertwine the city. I consider myself lucky
in a way. Level two is by no means glamorous, hell, even now as I walk the street I can spot at
least four shady figures, whom I'm sure will either kill or be killed by the day ends. However,
there is none of that cutthroat shit that goes on below, nor the severely shortened lifespan of
living above. Eventually I arrived at the place, it was a dilapidated alley, not exactly a welcoming
sight, but someone with my job description can't be too picky. Still, I wasn't born yesterday, so
before I entered, I discretely loaded my handgun and hid it in a small compartment on my legs, you
can't be too careful. Finally I took a deep breath and entered the cramped corridor.

There was no one inside, there wasn't even a sign of anyone treading here in a long time, so I
figured someone duped me. But just as I was about leave, I've heard a voice from behind my back.

"Are you the investigator?"

"Who's asking?" - I replied while turning around, but I was quickly stopped by the cold poke of a
barrel on my neck.

"I'm afraid I can't show my face to you, I'm sure you'll understand once you hear the details. The
CEO of GutCo was found dead this morning."

My stomach sank for a second, GutCo was one of the major food packaging factories in the city, at
least half of Modos got their daily grime from that place so the guy running it must have been
filthy rich.

"Sorry, whoever you are, but that sounds like a case too big for an old cop like me. Plus, you could
probably bribe a gang to investigate such a high-profile target."

"Very astute, detective, however, we need someone who won't raise too many eyebrows. Provoking the
wrong people by letting some gangs run loose on the lower levels would fatally destabilize
Modos. You on the other hand could fit in with very little explanation necessary."

"Alright, but what's in for me?"

"Well, for one your life. I hope you won't hold a grudge, but this info is quite taboo on this level
and I can't let any free agents walk away with the knowledge. On the other hand we're not cruel
people, Mr. Ned. If you find our murderer, you'll be handsomely rewarded and we promise never to
interfere with your life again."

"Tsk, you make a convincing argument." - I replied with some spite, - "I guess I have no
choice. Spill the beans then and take that damn gun out of my neck."

The mysterious contact let out a chuckle and pulled away their weapon. However, I didn't hear them
put it away, so I decided to not risk taking a peek.

"I admire your boldness, Mr. Ned. The victim was found yesterday in his apartment, the cause of
death was blunt force trauma. However, there is no sign of intrusion, nor any evidence that anyone
else was there that day. It's not much I know, but you're an old man in a city where people die
young, so I'm sure you'll manage. Oh, don't worry about getting in, we already made arrangements for
that, the only thing that's on you is getting there."

Before I could reply I felt the bash of a club on the back of my head and blacked out. The bastard
was so unsure whether I'd go back on my word that he had to resort to something like this. I slowly
got up, my head aching from the blow. They left a calling card, however, it only contained the
victim's address, with no way of contacting them if anything happens. Brilliant.

## Chapter 2

I knew I can't waste any time. Whoever goes this far for discretion will surely have no problems
with finding me again if I prove unsatisfactory. Before I could investigate the victim, however, I
had to talk with an old friend of mine called Lem. Lem was a bit of an enigma, he's a Mudokon, a
species usually best described as naive and superstitious, but he was different. No one knows how he
arrived to Modos, but he quickly rose the ranks and is now one of the most well-respected smugglers
in the city. If you need something and you got the Moolah, you go to Lem. In my case this entailed
information and an alibi.

Now, someone of Lem's caliber usually lived on at least level three, however, again due to what
those money-worshiping hippies like to forget so much, someone like him would be like a piece of
soap on a coal-pile down there. So as an ironic twist of fate it was this level that he found his
"audience," so to speak. This of course comes really handy in a situation like this, as has many
times before on my older cases.

I got into another cab and got off at a dance club. Lem owned the place and I'm sure it bought him
some nice cash, but its real purpose was to serve as a front to his actual business. I entered the
place and my head was immediately filled with the monotonous beating of whatever crap they were
playing this night. Never was a fan of clubs like these, below their sugary guises, they're places
of debauchery, crime and danger. Many die for as little as stepping on the wrong person's toe and I
didn't intend to join them. I carefully navigated through the crowd, surveying the faces until I
finally found who I was looking for. The guy was a fellow Slig, probably much younger than me,
albeit his skin looked deathly pale. Probably due to some bad cigars, it wasn't my place to ask so
I'll probably never know. He was sitting next to a thick curtain, that hid the VIP lounge from
prying eyes. He looked at me his eyes questioning behind the mask. Guy must be new, I figured, the
old bouncer recognized me without the need for pointless banter.

"I'm here to see my old friend. We've a long history."

"Yeah, yeah, heard all the stories before old man, just give me a name."

"Ned." - I replied curtly. Perhaps in the past behavior like this would have upset me, but I'd be
lying if I didn't sympathize with this sort of brazen youthfulness. The city will eventually kill
this out of everyone, so who am I to deny it early?

Just as I was done with my musings, he returned, holding the curtain with one hand and beckoning me
with the other.

"The boss says you're legit, go right in."

"Thanks, kid." - I said as I walked past him. He was visibly not amused at my comment, but due to
the fact that I'm Lem's friend he could not lay a finger on me.

## Chapter 3

The world behind the curtain was quite different compared to the craze outside. The walls were
decorated with expensive images and the only others who were around were a few burly bouncers and of
course Lem himself.

"Ned, my friend! What brings you to my humble abode?" - He asked. Despite all his wealth and power,
he was always a humorous guy. If only his jokes weren't so terrible.

"Hello Lem. I'm in dire need of your services and I need privacy." - I said glancing at the
monstrous guards.

"The great detective afraid of my guards?" - He laughed.

"Please Lem, cut the shit. This is serious business." 

My tone seems to have gone through to him, because he stopped laughing and nodded towards the
guards, who shuffled out of view.
