---
title: "The End"
---

# The End

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/theend/endofodd.png" description="[It's a fitting theme actually...](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rQiHzcdUPAU)" %}

All good things must eventually come to an end. In Oddwords' case, this happens today. I'll give you
my reasons and tie up some loose ends further down the line, but if you're only interested in the
immediate effects, here's your TL;DR:

- The site will likely receive no further updates.
- I have no intentions of taking the site offline.
- I'm effectively leaving the fandom.

## The future of Oddwords

As mentiond in the introduction, the site is for all purposes finished. I don't have the drive to
write about Oddworld anymore, nor do I really have any material to work with. I was hoping Soulstorm
might deliver enough lore and bring enough new people that I'd both find a bigger audience
interested in my more analytical style and the inspiration to write posts, like I have back in 2018.
Neither have happened, so I'm calling it quits. I'm unwilling to lower my standards to meaningless
theories and chasing after "what if"-s, yet there is little else to talk about.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/theend/konyec.webp" description='Parodying the locally famous ["товарищи, конец!"](https://img0.hvg.hu/image.aspx?id=f5a9a65c-85fe-4346-a116-ee5add62a838&view=54bc8a0e-b0dc-4420-8864-2b54f4f60ed5) ("Comrades,
it\'s over!") poster, which celebrated the fall of State-Socialism in Hungary.' %}

However, I'm still going to keep the site alive. Rent only costs about $3 yearly, which even in my
considerably poorer country is an extremely friendly price. I believe my site still contains
valuable information that you can't find anywhere else on the internet and I hate the destruction of
information. Thus, as long as it's able to, Oddwords.hu will stay online.

## A Short Fandom Autopsy

Looking over the fan communities of the series paints a bleak picture. OWF, the website, has been
long dead and the Reddit just recently expired. The few remaining fans hang around on Discords and
are clearly divided into two groups of polar-opposites. On one hand you have people who refuse to
let go and continue to take almost personal offence at any implication that the series might be in
very hot water. On the other, you have a group that looks at the series with almost nihilistic
scorn, accepting only Oddysee and Exoddus (and rarely Stranger.)

These two groups can obviously never coexist in the same space and any attempts otherwise caused
nasty arguments and the massive divide in the fandom we can observe today. Nowadays, if you go to
OWI's Discord, you'll see little dissent. Most people there act either neutral or very positive
towards Soulstorm. Aside from a few poor souls, who soldier on and keep posting their artworks or
discussions or other kind of fan works, the place is practically dead. The daily traffic hardly
reaches three hundred messages on a normal day and my own tiny, 800 members-strong Discord generates
as many messages in a single month as the server did in half a year, despite it having five times as
many users.

As activity has recently crawled to a near complete halt in both groups, I've decided to minimize my
involvement in the fandom too. One might say I'm leaving, though this is not entirely the case. I
have indeed left the official server as I had little in common with the people there and clearly
some people didn't appreciate my - perhaps a bit unorthodox - beliefs about the series. (No hard
feelings!) However, as I have made many friends on the community servers, I'm still sticking around
on those. If you really want to reach me for some reason, that's where you should be looking for me.

## A Soulstorm-review...

Please believe me when I say, I've tried my hardest at reviewing the game when it came out. I've
started writing at least three different posts, if not more, each time getting to around two
thousand words or so. Yet, each time I thought I'm making good progress, I always eventually hit a
roadblock and had to give up. Not that it matters much by now. Everyone who wanted to talk about
Soulstorm already made their arguments and most have already moved on to greener pastures. Due to
this, I'm going to keep things succinct.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/theend/fb.webp" description="Before the current peak the site had
154k likes, the lowest seen recently. Meanwhile the Twitter lost 300 followers since June and the
Instagram gained 100." %}

Regardless of your personal enjoyment of Soulstorm, objectively speaking, the game was almost a
complete failure in terms of revitalizing the series. Many talk about how the sales must have been
quite high due to being featured on PS+, but even if that was the case - I have my doubts, - OWI's
social media engagement has only moderately increased. Gaining only a few thousand new followers
isn't exactly the sort of attention this series needs to keep afloat.

If I were more malicious, I would honestly accuse OWI of sabotaging themselves. Soulstorm's story
makes so little sense and operates with so little emotional impact, that it's hard to even imagine
what all that money and time was spent on. Not to mention the bizarrely overcomplicated systems the
game operates with, which completely eschew the originals' no-nonsense design.

### Intro

The problems start right at the beginning of the game. Instead of starting at the iconic scene in
which the BigFace raises Abe's arm in triumph, we begin our story with him having an audience with a
shaman. Fair enough, a candid conversation between characters is a better way to impart exposition,
but why is this shaman not the BigFace? Hell, even better question: Where is the BigFace? He is
entirely absent from the game for some reason. Even though, now that Abe has brought 99 lost
Mudokons back into the flock, his spiritual counseling would be more important than ever. Not only
is this disrespectful towards his character, the shaman he has been replaced with doesn't even have
a chance to establish themselves. The plot mandates that Abe has to make the beginning of his
journey completely alone, so the shaman, who isn't even given a name, is unceremoniously squashed by
a pile of falling debris, which he doesn't even attempt to dodge. Who's this guy? Why should we feel
sad about his death? His death should feel tragic, however, due to how suddenly it happens, it
rather ends up being fairly comedic. Abe himself gets over it so quickly that he never even mentions the
event again, even after the shaman's ghostly voice talks to him for a little while before he gets
outside Monsaic.

### Locations

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/theend/monsaic.webp" description="Half the heart and half the flavor." %}

Speaking of which, I find it unforgivable how the Monsaic Lines were butchered. In my childhood,
this area was perhaps my favorite and I'm still quite fond of it. It emanated an aura of mystery,
with beautiful vegetation and structures, like massive spears, whose purpose was fully inscrutable
to the player. Also, for the first time we saw Mudokons live freely which was a stark contrast to
the slaves toiling away in RuptureFarms. In comparison, Soulstorm's Monsaic is a brown mass of rocks
with random patches of similarly colored plants that just makes me want to cry. The locals are
nowhere to be seen, similarly gone are the spears, the magnificent statues of the Mudokons' holy
animals, and the long tubes that connected the Lines to the rest of the world. The whole area feels
nothing more than a generic cave full of pitiful fire effects that sometimes appear out of thin air.
So much for the series' trademark realism, right?

I will not go into much detail about the rest of the areas, but to sum it up, everything that has
been brought over from Exoddus feels less interesting and the new areas are all incredibly generic
and soulless. Surely either the Ruins or the Funicular could have been cut and replaced with a visit
to BoneWerkz instead, no? Why do we need not one, but two levels that can be summed up as rocky
wastelands with nothing interesting going on? I can visualise nearly every screen of both Oddysee
and Exoddus from memory, but I'm struggling to even name all of the areas in Soulstorm because they
are so forgettable.

### Villains

The locations aren't the only things that suffer from a rough adaptation either. Dear god, what have
they done to Molluck? There is an argument to be made that the only reason why he was so menacing in
Oddysee is because he had extremely few lines and mostly just relied on "looking scary." That's fair
and it'd be disingenuous to claim that AO's narrative had no flaws, but wouldn't you rather take
silent-Molluck any day over what we got here? In Soulstorm Molluck is acts as nothing more than a
whiny pushover, who has zero agency in the plot and who is quickly relegated to the background role of
comic relief and chasing Abe around without him even realising this. His own Slig chauffeur turns
out to be a way more interesting and likeable character, who single-handedly carries every single
scene the two appear in, not to mention steals the spotlight at the story's climax.

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/theend/molluck.webp" description="" %}

The rest of the villains aren't much to praise either. I don't know who came up with the idea that
Abe should never interact with them, but it leads to an extremely weird narrative where Abe's
actions have very little impact and everything is resolved through the doings of others. The new
Glukkons are all unremarkable and lack the charm that made the old trio so beloved. For instnace,
OWI kept Aslik's name, but with the character acting nothing like their name implies, the joke stops
being funny and just becomes childish. This is supposed to be OWI's "darkest and most serious game
yet." I assume this "seriousness" is what drove OWI to cut Dripik. However, his absence didn't just
lead to the War Room being cut, which was one of the most memorable locations of Exoddus, but also
makes the Barracks feel empty and illogical. Who runs the place? Does it just exist? Who collects
the cash for it? Is there a Slig-at-Arms or something that acts as the de-facto leader of the place?
Questions the game wants us to conveniently forget about.

### The Brew

Then there is the Brew. SoulStorm Brew in Exoddus was a brilliant plot device. It haunted Abe from
the beginning to the very end in both terms of narrative and as literal bottles that marked secret
areas for the player. It even acted as a sort of "baby's first body-horror" as Abe was forced to
consume his very own ancestors and fart them out to fight against the Cartel. It was absurd, it was
silly, but it still worked well. Compared to this, Soulstorm's Brew is incapable of feeling nearly
as impactful, despite it being set up to be far more dangerous than it was in the original game. The
48 hour death-clock is nullified by the fact that Abe and his rescued Mudokons conveniently have a
seemingly unlimited supply of Brew on their train.

The sickness in Exoddus was one of the main drives of the narrative, whose solution required Abe to
travel through two trials and prove himself again, and even after that he required the help of other
Mudokon shamans to provide him with the healing rings. It felt like a desperate fight, for which
even the prophetized Savior of the Mudokons required outside aid to not end in complete catastrophe.
In Soulstorm, however, it was turned into a complete joke. Abe invents the antidote on the spot from
literal bat shit and some plants and from then on he is capable of healing any and every Mudokon he
comes across without issue. Where's the urgency? Where's the horrifying atmosphere the initial black
and white trailers implied? The Mudokons even do a cheerful little jump when you save them, even
though they have been nearing a very painful death.

### Wildlife... or the lack of thereof

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/theend/sleech.png" description='"There’s a new wildlife in
Soulstorm and its going to make paramites look like puppies." - [Lorne Lanning](/lanningqna)' %}

The wildlife too didn't survive the butchering. What RuptureFarms wasn't able to accomplish,
Soulstorm did without breaking a sweat: Both Scrabs and Paramites are a thing of the past. They
actually aren't even ever mentioned anywhere. For a new player, Abe's tattoos could mean anything.
Nothing implies that the Shrykull is actually a mixture of two previously established creatures, it
might as well be a brand new thing. Instead, we were given a single new species, called the
"Sleeches." These little balls of tentacles are what OWI was able to come up with after spending
more than five years in development to replace the Fleeches. The A.L.I.V.E. principles are
completely ignored. They look like even less interesting Fuzzles, which is frankly an
accomplishment, just not a positive one. On the Industrialist front too, there is little variety.
Sloggies are gone and their fully grown versions are stupider than ever, not even listening to Sligs
anymore. The previously mentioned Fleeches are nowhere to be found. Finally, while there are many
variations of Sligs, in practice it makes little difference whether you encounter a shotgunner or a
machine-gunner or whichever other version that might run at you as your strategy with dealing with
them is largely the same.

### The Music

Before wrapping things up there is one thing that can't go without mention: The music. Music in
Oddworld was always one of those things I never really consciously noticed, until it eventually
dawned on me just how well it worked. By largely relying on industrial noises and tribal
instruments, the music was able to give a certain sense of the areas being "lived-in" or "alive." In
RuptureFarms you heard the hum of the many meat-processing machines, in Monsaic Lines the mysterious
chimes of the Mudokons, and so on. Admittedly, it's not the sort of music I'd listen to in my idle
time, but it fits the game amazingly.

Meanwhile, in Soulstorm you can hardly even hear the music, because it's so quiet! And even once you
do crank your volume to max, what you hear are a few anemic beats of uninspired electronic music.
The only track that even moderately invokes the feeling of the old games is the title screen theme,
which utilizes things like throat singing. It still isn't great due to being so over the top, but it
at least dares to experiment. Meanwhile, once you start the game, you can say goodbye to any sort of
tribal-sounding music because even in the native areas you only hear the same instruments as
everywhere else. What's most baffling about all this is that the music was composed by the same
person who created the music for the originals, so there isn't even the possibility of there being a
lack of talent.

### The All-in-all

There is more to say of course, I could spend a lot of time talking about the tackled-on crafting
system, the utterly frustrating checkpoints that require a mod to become just bearable, how
constrained and secondary possession now feels despite all the bells and whistles OWI hung on it or
the absolutely unacceptable state the game came out in. However, all this will be addressed in
detail in another project done by someone else eventually. I don't want to ruin all the fun after
all.

All in all, while there are excuses, (some of which are valid, like the Covid-pandemic) of why
Soulstorm ended up the way it did, ultimately it remains an extremely weird game characterized by
amateurish choices, a crippled narrative and a fandom that's more estranged than ever. I don't see
any chance of Oddworld ever becoming a "big thing," unless perhaps if its ownership changes hands.
Even then, the era of cinematic platformers is largely over, which means an Oddworld Game \#3 seems
all but impossible.

Go and buy [Pacifist Outside](https://store.steampowered.com/app/1779810/Pacifist_Outside/) instead.
It's the closest thing we have to a spiritual-successor.

## The Ending of The End

> **Spec Ops: The Line:** No matter what happens next, don't be too hard on yourself. Even now,
> after all you've done, you can still go home. Lucky you.

Well, here we are after nearly three long years, five if we count the time I've spent in the fandom
even before starting the site, fifteen if I start the clock from when I first played Oddysee on a
dingy little CRT TV. Because my post has been a tad negative, I want to wrap things up in a bit more
positive light:

{% include caption.html url="/imgs/theend/space.png" description='"There is no Quintology!" - Parodying a Cold War-era [Soviet
poster](https://preview.redd.it/fnpjtmc5dmz51.jpg?auto=webp&s=950aeea34d6c23ea9fe74a2f9c85c24464be2272),
which said the same about God.' %}

I'd like to thank any and all of you who have interacted with me over the years. I've met with a ton
very interesting people over the years, many of whom broadened my views about the world in ways I
didn't think possible. I'd thank the people who continued to read my site even after content slowed
to a crawl and provided feedback and discourse. I'd like to thank the people who taught me about
Oddworld, without whom I could have never started this website. I am standing on the shoulders of
giants. I will also always be thankful for the original Oddysee and Exoddus. These two games have
been pivotal gaming experiences for me and have provided endless hours of entertainment (and
frustration of the good kind.)

At the end of the day, it was fun wasn't it? I hope I might meet some of you again in a different
fandom. Until then...

# _Goodbye_
